The central thesis, that the bias prevailing in the financial markets can affect the so-called fundamentals that markets are supposed to reflect, does not seem to have registered. 

The concept ofreflexivity is very simple. In situations that have thinking participants, there is a two-way interaction between the participants5 thinking and the situation in which they participate. On the one hand, participants seek to understand reality; on the other, they seek to bring about a desired outcome.The two functions work in opposite directions: in the cognitive function reality is the given; in the participating function, the participants' understanding is the constant. The two functions can interfere with each other by rendering what is supposed to be given, contingent. I call the interference between the two functions “reflexivity.'' I envision reflexivity as a feedback loop between the participants' understanding and the situation in which they participate, and I contend that the concept ofreflexivity is crucial to understanding situations that have thinking participants.

The imperfection I am concerned with arises because we are participants. When we act as outside observers we can make statements that do or do not correspond to the facts without altering the facts; when we act as participants, our actions alter the situation we seek to understand. As a consequence, we cannot base our decisions on knowledge.

I contend that financial markets are always wrong in the sense that they operate with a prevailing bias, but the bias can actually validate itself by influencing not only market prices but also the so-called fundamentals that market prices are supposed to reflect.

Beyond a certain point the self-validating feedback loops become unsustainable. That is how reflexivity gives rise to initially self-fulfilling but eventually self-defeating prophesies and processes.The most spectacular manifestation is in the boom/bust sequences that are characteristic of financial markets.

It is an interesting question why such an unrealistic interpretation of financial markets as the efficient market hypothesis should have gained such widespread acceptance. The answer is to be found in the requirements of economic theory as a scientific pursuit. Scientific theories are supposed to have some predictive value, and the efficient market hypothesis seeks to meet that requirement, while the theory of reflexivity does not. On the contrary, it contends that the course of events is inherently unpredictable. Thus, the former qualifies as a scientific theory (albeit a false one) while the latter does not. I have acknowledged this fact by entitling my book The Alchemy of Finance, as distinct from science.

We live in the real world, but our view of the world does not correspond to the real world. The theory of rational expectations itself provides a striking example ofhow far our interpretation can stray from the real world.Yet our view of the world is part of the real world~we are participants.And the gap between reality and our interpretation ofit introduces an element of uncertainty into the real world.

Invoking both the correspondence and coherence theories of truth, I can proclaim what I call the "human uncertainty principle." That principle holds that peoples understanding of the world in which they live cannot correspond to the facts and be complete and coherent at the same time. Insofar as peoples thinking is confined to the facts, it is not sufficient to reach decisions; and insofar as it serves as the basis of decisions, it cannot be confined to the facts. 

Heisenbergs uncertainty principle does not influence the behavior of quantum particles one iota; they would behave the same way ifthe principle had never been discovered.The same is not true ofthe human uncertainty principle. Theories about human behavior can and do influence human behavior. Marxism had a tremendous impact on history and market fundamentalism is having a similar influence today A phrase like "the axis of evil" can alter the course of history; and calling the estate tax “the death tax" can influence public policy

As we have seen, people base their actions not on reality but on their view of the world, and the two are not identical. As a result even past history cannot be treated in the same way as natural phenomena because it does not consist only of hard facts like the birth and death of kings. Social situations like revolutions or political compromises have different meanings for difierent participants, and even after the event they are subject to different interpretations.2 Myths about the past have a bearing on the future. The battle of Kosovo in 1389 loomed large in the recent breakup of Yugoslavia. This poses problems for scientific method, but at the same time renders scientific knowledge less important in the understanding and shaping of human affairs. History is a story, and there is plenty ofroom for magic, superstition, rehgion, and other beliefs.

Many reviews described reflexivity by saying that prevailing sentiments greatly influence market prices. Ifthat were all, I would be indeed belaboring the obvious. What makes reflexivity interesting is that the prevailing bias has ways, via the market prices, to affect the so-called fundamentals that market prices are supposed to reflect. Only when the fundamentals are affected does reflexivity become significant enough to influence the course of events.

There is a reflexive connection between the act oflending and the value of the collateral, and it is the liquidation of credit that gives the boom/bust model its asymmetric shape: slowly rising and abruptly falling. Similarly, there is a reflexive interaction betrween regulators and the economy they regulate, and financial crises usually lead to a tightening of regulations.

 Market fundamentalists insinuate that markets have a moral quality about them by allowing the diligent and creative participants to come out ahead. This argument always sufiered from neglecting the social injustice of unequal initial endowments; but it is entirely destroyed iffinancial markets do not merely permit free exchange but promote the dominance of the powerful. As I have pointed out elsewhere,5 the distinguishing feature of financial markets is that they are amoral; that is one ofthe factors that make them so efficient. But society cannot exist without morality; therefore it cannot rely exclusively on market discipline. Market fundamentalism is a convenient ideology for the rich and powerful.

The omission of power relations also makes it impossible to understand the present moment in history There is a dominant group within the Bush administration that believes that international relations are relations of power, not law, and the United States, being the most powerful state, has the right to impose its will on the rest ofthe world.They held this beliefbefore September 11,2001, and, to the extent they could, they acted upon it. They renounced international treaties and sought to make American military power absolute by militarizing space. But they were constrained by the lack of a clear political mandate from the voters. The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, changed that.The Bush administration can now claim to be acting in self-defense and carry the nation behind it. The beliefs of this dominant group are incorporated in the Bush doctrine. It is built on two pillars: first, the United States must do whatever is necessary to maintain its unquestioned military dominance, and, second, the United States reserves the right to engage in preemptive strikes. I believe this is a dangerous doctrine. Carried to its logical conclusion, the Bush doctrine establishes two classes of sovereignty in the world: the sovereignty ofthe United States, which is sacrosanct and not subject to limitations imposed by international law and the sovereignty of other states, which is subject to the Bush doctrine.This carries echoes ofGeorge Orwell's AnimalFarm: all animals are equal but the pigs are more equal than the others. Even i£ under the influence ofSeptember 11, the American public went along with the Bush doctrine, the rest of the world could never accept it.Therefore it will have to be enforced by the use ofmilitary power.

For instance, it implies that investors base their decisions on the fundamentals, whereas the goal of market participants is to make money. Only if market prices reflected the fundamentals accurately would it make sense for them to be guided by those fundamentals— and in that case, nobody could make more money than anybody else and everyone ought to invest in index funds.This is an absurd conclusion, yet it is still widely accepted.

The new paradigm cannot treat facts as if they constituted reality and statements as if they constituted thinking. Instead of drawing dichotomies between thinking and reality, we must recognize that thinking forms part of reality instead of being separate from it. This integrated reality cannot be described by statements that are separate and independent of it. Such statements would immediately accrue to the subject matter, enlarging it and requiring additional statements to correspond to it. The dichotomy between thinking and reality is itself something that was not discovered but rather invented by us in our attempt to understand reality; as such, it became part of reality and rendered reality more difficult to understand.

The benefit of this approach is that it focuses our attention on the divergence between outcomes and expectations. Outcomes are affected but not determined by expectations. There is a two-way feedback loop between them: the cognitive function runs from outcomes to expectations, the participating function from expectations to outcomes. Both functions operate continuously and in opposite directions. The arrow of causation does not run from one set of outcomes to the next; it crisscrosses from outcomes to expectations and vice versa. I have called this the "shoelace theory of history."

Thinking is not confined to observable facts. People think of all aspects of reality not only the objective one and they care a lot about what others think, lb give a more accurate picture, the outcome should include not only observable facts but all aspects of reality including the thinking ofthe participants.

We may therefore draw a distinction between humdrum and historic events, depending on the impact that the participants' misconceptions have on the course of events. In humdrum, everyday events the effect is negligible; in historic events, the impact is significant enough to alter the participants' perceptions. I call those misconceptions that influence the course of history "'fertile fallacies.” We can then assert that fertile fallacies and other misconceptions provide the key to history.

The new paradigm can be formulated in purely abstract terms by asserting that all human constructs are fallible. The term constructs, includes both thinking and reality: institutions as well as conceptual frameworks, theories, and points of view. The term "fallible'' refers to something more than the possibility that our constructs may be flawed; it asserts that most of our constructs are, in fact, flawed. Reality is full of flawed constructs. The fact that a certain way of thinking prevails does not mean that it is valid; the fact that an institution exists does not mean that it is well constructed. That is what sets social constructs like governments or religions apart from physical constructs like bridges or automobiles. A badly designed car will not run while social institutions or ideologies can be badly flawed and still persist.

Credit cannot be treated as if it were merely a passive reflection of the underlying fundamentals, since it also plays an active role in shaping those fundamentals. This can be seen when we consider the relationship between the act of lending and the value of the collateral. Banks base their lending on the value ofthe collateral; but the act oflending can also influence that value.When people are eager to borrow and the banks are willing to lend, the value ofthe collateral rises in a self^reinforcing manner and vice versa. 

Flaws and misconceptions play a crucial role in individual boom/ bust sequences. Usually they involve a failure to recognize that a relationship is reflexive. In the great sovereign lending boom of the 1970s, the mistake was not to recognize that the banks' willingness to lend enhanced the various debt ratios by which the banks measured the borrowersJ creditworthiness. In the conglomerate boom the error was the willingness of investors to put a high value on earnings growth generated by acquisitions that reinforced the overvaluation of conglomerates. The misconception in the recent technology boom was even more egregious. Investors valued top-line revenue growth disregarding that the business models could be sustained only as long as companies could sell stock at inflated prices. In the absence of such flaws and misconceptions, market excesses tend to correct themselves in short order; but when the so-called fundamentals are susceptible to such influences the self-correcting mechanism of the markets is impaired and an initially seltreinfbrcing but eventually self-defeating process is set in motion.

We are currently (March 2003) at a point where the strong dollar may have become unsustainable.

In my investment career I operated on the assumption that all investment theses are flawed. This proposition itself is flawed: it does not follow from the human uncertainty principle that all theories are flawed. But it is a very useful assumption to work with. The fact that a thesis is flawed does not mean that we should not invest in it as long as other people believe in it and there is a large group ofpeople left to be convinced. The point was made by John Maynard Keynes when he compared the stock market to a beauty contest where the winner is not the most beautiful contestant but the one whom the greatest number ofpeople consider beautiful.Where I have something significant to add is in pointing out that it pays to look for the flaws; ifwe find them, we are ahead ofthe game because we can limit our losses when the market also discovers what we already know. It is when we are unaware of what could go wrong that we have to worry.

There is a difference between what is successful and what is true. That is one ofthe great insights that the theory ofreflexivity has to offer and it applies both to the financial markets and politics.

In human affairs flaws and misconceptions play the same role as mutation does in biology but it is ideas and behavior patterns that are being propagated, not genes.

The main similarity lies in a self-reinforcing process whereby inflated stock prices can accelerate an underlying trend, which in turn enhances expectations and inflates stock prices until the outcomes fail to sustain expectations and there is a crash. In the conglomerate boom the process had to do with using inflated stock for acquisitions. In the Internet and telecom boom, inflated stock prices accelerated the introduction of new technologies. In each case, there was a misconception involved. In the conglomerate boom investors put the same value on per-share earnings irrespective of how they were achieved; in the technology boom the error was more egregious: stocks were valued at a multiple ofrevenues, not earnings, and growth was financed by selling stock, not by following sound business plans. In each case the misconceptions were reinforced by positive changes in the fundamentals: earnings and revenue growth accelerated. Expectations were inflated until they became unsustainable. Eventually a turning point was reached. In the conglomerate boom it came when Sol Steinberg was unsuccessful in taking over Chemical Bank. In the technology boom the critical event was the auctioning of 3G licenses in Europe. Telecom companies were obliged to make inflated bids in order to justify their inflated stock prices. Until then, inflated stock prices had been a source of cash; on that occasion they turned into a cash drain. As stocks began to decline the trend became self^reinfbrcing in the opposite direction. The excesses that could be concealed while stock prices were rising started to surface. During the boom, corporations had used every avenue at their disposal to boost earnings, and when they ran out of legitimate devices, some corporations turned to illegitimate ones. When the market turned, some of these illegitimate practices were exposed.The coup de grace was delivered when Enron went bust. Enron, like many companies, used special purpose entities (SPEs) to keep debts off its balance sheets. But unlike many other companies, it used its own stock to guarantee the debt of its SPEs.When the price ofEnron fell, the scheme unraveled, exposing a number of other financial misdeeds the company had committed. The Enron bankruptcy reinforced the downtrend in the stock market, which led to further bankruptcies and news of further corporate and individual misdeeds. Both the downtrend and the clamor for corrective action gathered momentum in a self-reinfbrcing fashion― ust as the boom/bust model envisions.

Most ofthe misdeeds ofthe recent boom fall into two categories: a decline in professional standards and a dramatic rise in conflicts ofinterest.And both are really symptoms ofthe same broader phenomenon: the glorification offinancial gain irrespective of how it is achieved.The professions—lawyers, accountants, auditors, security analysts, corporate officers, and bankers—allowed the pursuit of profit to take precedence over long-standing professional values. Security analysts promoted stocks in order to gain investment-banking business; bankers, lawyers, and auditors aided and abetted deceptive practices for the same reason. While only a small number of people committed acts that actually qualify as criminal, many more engaged in activities that in retrospect appear dubious and misleading. They did so thanks to reassuring legal opinions, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), and the comforting knowledge that everybody else was doing the same. When broad principles are minutely codified—as they are in GAAP—the rules paradoxicaBy become easier to evade. A whole industry was born, called structured finance, largely devoted to rule evasion. Once a financial innovation was successfully introduced it was eagerly imitated, and the limits ofthe acceptable were progressively pushed out by aggressive and unscrupulous practitioners.

Market fundamentalism is a false and dangerous ideology. It is false on at least two counts. First, it profoundly misapprehends the way fi­nancial markets operate. It assumes that markets tend toward an equilibrium that assures the optimum allocation of resources. Second, by equating private interests with the public interest, market fundamentalism endows the pursuit of self-interest with a moral quality.

Reflexivity may or may not give rise to a boom/bust sequence and the process may be aborted at any time. Each case contains unique features. The model has some predictive power—for instance, a bust could never precede a boom, and the magnitude ofthe bust tends to be proportionate to the boom that preceded it—but it is minimal.

As a money manager I was emotionally engaged in managing my fund. I managed it as ifmy existence depended on it, as indeed it did. I relied on my instincts and intuition as well as my conceptual framework to guide me through uncertainty. A number offactors conspired to increase my dependence on emotions. For one thing, I had less knowledge and information at my disposal than most other fund managers. I had never studied security analysis, I was not part of a team, and I was ready to engage in a much broader range of activities than most others. I was not well positioned to perform better than others ifI had

tried to play the market by a particular set ofrules; my competitive advantage lay in recognizing changes in the rules of the game. I started with hypotheses relating to individual companies; with the passage of time my interests veered increasingly toward macroeconomic themes. This was due partly to the growth ofthe fund and partly to the growing instability of the macroeconomic environment.

Specializing in reflexive change put me under tremendous time pressure. I had to familiarize myself with particular industries or countries at short notice, and having done so I did not have the luxury of keeping up-to-date. I used to claim, only halfjokingly, that it took me 48 hours to become an expert on any subject; ifI spent any more time on it my judgment would be clouded by the facts. Specialists often develop a vested interest in their subject; the information they collect is never enough for them. I was only interested in the information that was sufficient to make a decision; the rest would merely confuse the issues. I called it "going for the jugular. I also developed the practice of "'investing first and investigating later." It worked very well because if an idea was appealing enough to attract me on first hearing, it was likely to have the same effect on others. On further investigation, if I found it to be flawed I could always turn around and liquidate my position with a profit provided I was not the last one to hear it. If the idea checked out, I was better situated to increase my position because I had already bought at a lower price or sold short at a higher one.

The major insight I gained from the theory ofreflexivity and what I now call the human uncertainty principle is that all human constructs (concepts, business plans or institutional arrangements) are flawed. The flaws may be revealed only after the construct has come into existence. That is the key to understanding reflexive processes. Recognizing the flaws that are likely to appear when a hypothesis becomes reality puts you ahead ofthe game.

The task is easier if the participant is moved by the same emotions. That is what I sought to achieve by identifying myself with my fund. It should be recognized, however, that the process involves something very different from rational thought; it is better described as empathy. The participant enters into the mind of the market and tries to understand it from the inside.  found the task easier than most other investors, partly because of my conceptual framework and partly because I identified myself with my hedge fund so intimately. I assumed that the market felt the same way as I did, and by keeping myself detached from other personal feelings I could sense changes in its mood. This was a hard discipline. It meant subordinating my own emotions to those ofthe market.

I made a conscious effort to find investment theses that were at odds with the prevailing opinion because that is where the best profit opportunities are to be found. I defined my task as engaging in an arbitrage between my own judgment and the prevailing view. 

I had the luxury ofignoring rational expectations theory; I could not ignore modern risk and performance management techniques even if I consider them flawed. I would have to understand how they work because, in contrast to rational expectations theory they do influence investor behavior.

 I was willing to risk only my gains, not my capital. This gave the fund its own momentum: picking up speed when the wind was behind us and trimming sails in stormy weather. My favorite saying was: "He who runs away lives to fight another day” I refused to be bound by the calendar in deciding what counts as profit and what is principal. After a good run, I was willing to give back a portion of the gains even if it pushed me into negative territory in a new year.

Fundamental analysis is more interesting because it is an outgrowth of equilibrium theory. Stocks are supposed to have a true or fundamental value as distinct from their current market price. The fundamental value of a stock may be defined either in relation to the earning power of the underlying assets or in relation to the fundamental value of other stocks. In either case, the market price of a stock is supposed to tend toward its fundamental value over a period of time so that the analysis offundamental values provides a useful guide to investment decisions. The important point about this approach is that the connection between stock prices and the companies whose stocks are traded is assumed to be in one direction. The fortunes of the companies determine—however belatedly一the relative values of the various stocks traded in the stock market. The possibility that stock market developments may affect the fortunes of the companies is left out of account…Stock market valuations have a direct way ofinfluencing underlying values: through the issue and repurchase of shares and options and through corporate transactions of all kinds—mergers, acquisitions, going public, going private, and so on. There are also more subtle ways in which stock prices may influence the standing of a company: credit rating, consumer acceptance, management credibility, etc. The influence of these factors on stock prices is, of course, fully recognized; it is the influence ofstock prices on these factors that is so strangely ignored by the fundamentalist approach.

 I take a totally opposite point of view: I do not accept the proposition that stock prices are a passive reflection of underlying values, nor do I accept the proposition that the reflection tends to correspond to the underlying value. I contend that market valuations are always distorted; moreover—and this is the crucial departure from equilibrium theory—the distortions can afiect the underlying values. Stock prices are not merely passive reflections; they are active ingredients in a process in which both stock prices and the fortunes of the companies whose stocks are traded are determined. In other words, I regard changes in stock prices as part of a historical process and I focus on the discrepancy between the participants' expectations and the actual course of events as a causal factor in that process. To explain the process, I take the discrepancy as my starting point. I do not rule out the possibility that events may actually correspond to peoples expectations, but I treat it as a limiting case.Translating this assertion into market terms, I claim that market participants are always biased in one way or another. I do not deny that markets have a predictive or anticipating power that seems uncanny at times, but I argue that it can be explained by the influence that the participants' bias has on the course of events. For instance, the stock market is generally believed to anticipate recessions; it would be more correct to say that it can help to precipitate them.Thus I replace the assertion that markets are always right with two others: 1. Markets are always biased in one direction or another. 2. Markets can influence the events that they anticipate. How do these two factors interact? It will be recalled that there are two connections at play: the participating and the cognitive functions. The underlying trend influences the participants' perceptions through the cognitive function; the resulting change in perceptions affects the situation through the participating function. In the case of the stock market, the primary impact is on stock prices. The change in stock prices may in turn, affect both the participants' bias and the underlying trend. We have here a reflexive relationship in which stock prices are determined by two factors—underlying trend and prevailing bias—both of which are, in turn, influenced by stock prices.

When a trend is reinforced, it accelerates.When the bias is reinforced, the divergence between expectations and the actual course of future stock prices gets wider and, conversely when it is seltcorrecting, the divergence gets narrower. As far as stock prices are concerned, we shall describe them simply as rising and failing.When the prevailing bias helps to raise prices we shall call it positive; when it works in the opposite direction, negative.Thus rising prices are reinforced by a positive bias and falling prices by a negative one. In a boom/bust sequence we would expect to find at least one stretch where rising prices are reinforced by a positive bias and another where falling prices are reinforced by a negative bias. There must also be a point where the underlying trend and the prevailing bias combine to reverse the trend in stock prices.

A typical path for the two curves may be as follows. (See the figure on page 56.) At first, recognition of an underlying trend is lagging but the trend is strong enough to manifest itselfin earnings per share (AB). When the underlying trend is finally recognized, it is reinforced by rising expectations (BC). Doubts arise, but the trend survives. Alternatively, the trend waivers but reasserts itself. Such testing may be repeated several times, but here I show it only once (CD). Eventually conviction develops and it is no longer shaken by a setback in the earning trend (DE). Expectations become excessive, and fail to be sustained by reality (EF).The bias is recognized as such and expectations are lowered (FG). Stock prices lose their last prop and plunge (G).The underlying trend is reversed, reinforcing the decline (GH). Eventually, the pessimism becomes overdone and the market stabilizes (HI). It should be emphasized that this is only one possible path that results from the interplay of a single underlying trend and a prevailing bias. There could be more than one trend at work and the prevailing bias could have many nuances, so that the sequence of events might require a totally difierent representation.

The concept of an underlying trend has been introduced as a placeholder term, to denote changes in the 4"fundamentals?J What the fundamentals are has not been defined. Even the question ofhow the fundamentals are to be measured has not been answered. Earnings, dividends, asset value, free cash flow: all these yardsticks are relevant, as well as many others, but the relative weight given to each depends on the investorsJ judgments and is therefore subject to their bias. We may use earnings per share for purposes of illustration, but that merely begs the question. It is a question security analysts have been struggling with for a long time.

It is possible to have a reflexive connection between stock prices and the prevailing bias even if the fundamentals remain unaffected, but the connection becomes interesting only if the fundamentals are also involved. Without a change in fondamentals, the prevailing bias is likely to be corrected in short order, as we can observe in the daily fluctuations of stock prices. It would be quite in order to ignore the bias as mere noise. That is what the theory ofperfect competition and the fundamentalist approach to security analysis have done. By contrast, when the fundamentals are affected, the bias cannot be left out of account without serious distortion, because the bias gives rise to a seltreinfbrcing/self-defeating process that leaves neither stock prices, nor the fundamentals, nor the participants' views the same as they were before. 

The second generalization is that there is bound to be a flaw in the participants5 perception of the fundamentals. The flaw may not be apparent in the early stages but it is likely to manifest itself later on. When it does, it sets the stage fbr a reversal in the prevailing bias.

In any case, a reflexive model cannot take the place offundamental analysis: all it can do is to provide an ingredient that is missing from it. In principle, the two approaches could be reconciled. Fundamental analysis seeks to establish how underlying values are reflected in stock prices, whereas the theory of reflexivity shows how stock prices can influence underlying values. One provides a static picture, the other a dynamic one. A theory that offers a partial explanation ofstock price movements can be very useful to the investor especially ifit illuminates a relationship that other investors fail to grasp. Investors operate with limited funds and limited intelligence: they do not need to know everything. As long as they understand something better than others, they have an edge.

My best documented encounter with a boom/bust sequence is that ofReal Estate Investment Trusts. REITs, as they are called, are a special corporate form brought into existence by legislation.Their key feature is that they can distribute their income free of corporate taxation, provided they distribute all the income they receive. The opportunity created by this legislation remained largely unexploited until 1969 when a large number ofREITs were founded. I was present at the creation and, fresh from my experience with conglomerates, recognized their boom/bust potential. I published a research report whose key part reads as follows:
THE CONCEPT Superficially, mortgage trusts seem to resemble mutual funds designed to provide high current yields. But the analogy is misleading. The true attraction of mortgage trusts lies in their ability to generate capital gains for their shareholders by selling additional shares at a premium over book value. If a trust with a book value of $10 and a 12% return on equity doubles its equity by selling additional shares at $20, the book value jumps to $13.33 and pershare earnings go from $1.20 to $1.60. Investors are willing to pay a premium because of the high yield and the expectation of per-share earnings growth. The higher the premium, the easier it is for the trust to fulfill this expectation.The process is a self^reinforcing one. Once it gets under way, the trust can show a steady growth in per-share earnings despite the fact that it distributes practically all its earnings as dividends. Investors who participate in the process early enough can enjoy the compound benefits of a high return on equity a rising book value, and a rising premium over book value. 
ANALYTICAL APPROACH The conventional method ofsecurity analysis is to try and predict the future course of earnings and then to estimate the price that investors may be willing to pay for those earnings.This method is inappropriate to the analysis of mortgage trusts because the price that investors are willing to pay for the shares is an important factor in determining the future course of earnings. Instead of predicting future earnings and valuations separately, we shall try to predict the future course ofthe entire selfreinforcing process. We shall identify three major factors which reinforce each other and we shall sketch out a scenario of the probable course of development.The three factors are: 1. The effective rate ofreturn on the mortgage trusts capital 2. The rate of growth ofthe mortgage trusts size 3. Investor recognition, i.e., the multiple investors are willing to pay for a given rate of growth in per-share earnings
THE SCENARIO Act One: At present, the effective yield on construction loans is at an optimum. Not only are interest rates high but losses are at a relatively low level. There is a pent-up demand for housing and new houses readily find buyers.There is a shortage offunds so that the projects which do get oflF the ground are economically well justified. Builders who are still in business are more substantial and more reliable than at the tail end of a boom. Moreover, they do their utmost to complete the construction phase as fast as possible because money is so expensive. Shortages oflabor and material do cause defaults and delays but rising costs permit mortgage trusts to liquidate their commitments without loss. Money is tight and alternative sources ofinterim financing are in short supply. Investor recognition ofthe mortgage trust concept has progressed far enough to permit the formation of new trusts and the rapid expansion of existing ones. The self-reinforcing process gets under way Act Two: If and when inflation abates, the effective yield on construction loans will decline. On the other hand, there will be a housing boom and bank credit will be available at advantageous rates. With higher leverage, the rate of return on equity can be maintained despite a lower effective yield.With a growing market and growing investor recognition, the premium over book value may continue to increase. Mortgage trusts are likely to take full advantage ofthe premium and show a rapid rise in both size and per-share earnings. Since entry into the field is unrestricted, the number ofmortgage trusts will also increase. Act Three: The self^reinforcing process will continue until mortgage trusts have captured a significant part of the construction loan market. Increasing competition will then force them to take greater risks. Construction activity itself will have become more speculative and bad loans will increase. Eventually, the housing boom will slacken off and housing surpluses will appear in various parts ofthe country, accompanied by a slack real estate market and temporary declines in real estate prices. At this point, some ofthe mortgage trusts will be bound to have a large number of delinquent loans in their portfolios and the banks will panic and demand that their lines of credit be paid off. Act Four: Investor disappointment will affect the valuation of the group, and a lower premium coupled with slower growth will in turn reduce the per-share earnings progression. The multiple will decline and the group will go through a shakeout period. After the shakeout, the industry will have attained maturity: there will be few new entries, regulations may be introduced, and existing trusts will settle down to a more moderate growth.
EVALUATION The shakeout is a long time away Before it occurs, mortgage trusts will have grown manifold in size and mortgage trust shares will have shown tremendous gains. It is not a danger that should deter investors at the present time. The only real danger at present is that the self^reinfbrcing process may not get under way at all. In a really serious stock market decline investors may be unwilling to pay any premium even for a 12% return on equity.We doubt that such conditions would arise; we are more inclined to expect an environment in which a 12% return is more exceptional than it has been recently and in which the self-reinforcing processes of the last few years, notably conglomerates and computer leasing companies, are going through their shakeout period. In such an environment there should be enough money available for a self^reinforcing process which is just starting, especially ifit is the only game in town. If the process fails to get under way investors would find downside protection in the book value.The new trusts are coming to the market at book value plus underwriting commission (usually 10%). Most recently formed trusts are selling at a premium which is still modest. It will be recalled that when their assets are fully employed in interim loans, mortgage trusts can earn 11% on their book without leverage and 12% with a 1:1 leverage. A modest premium over book value would seemjustified even in the absence of growth. Ifthe self^reinfbrcing process does get under way, shareholders in well-managed mortgage trusts should enjoy the compound benefits of a high return on equity a rising book value, and a rising premium over book value for the next few years.The capital gains potential is ofthe same order of magnitude as at the beginning of other self-reinforcing processes in recent stock market history

Self^reinforcing/self-defeating cycles like the conglomerate boom and the REITs do not occur every day. There are long fallow periods when the specialist in such cycles remains unemployed. He need not starve, however. The divergence between underlying trends and investor recognition persists at all times and the astute investor can take advantage ofit. New industries arise, or old ones come back into favor. Typically, they are inadequately followed at first. For instance, when defense spending started to rise in the early 1970s after a long decline, there were only two or three analysts left who followed the industry although it still represented a substantial portion of the economy Those who were left were too demoralized to recognize the beginning of a major new trend.That was a wonderful time to invest in defense stocks.

Perhaps the most interesting case of negative bias occurred in technology stocks. After the stock market debacle of 1974, investors were leery of any company that needed to raise equity capital from outside sources. Distributed data processing was in the early stages ofits development. New companies like Datapoint and Four-Phase were in the vanguard with IBM lagging badly. The market was practically exploding but these little companies were hamstrung by their inability to raise capital. The stocks were selling at very low multiples of anticipated earnings and the main argument against them was that they would not be able to grow fast enough to meet the demand and eventually IBM would move into the market.The argument turned out to be valid, but not before these companies became large and prosperous and investors became eager to throw money at them at high multiples. Those who had been willing to fight the negative bias were amply rewarded. As the various niches occupied by these small companies converged to form a large market, most of them were absorbed by larger companies and those that stayed independent fell on evil days. Datapoint is currently looking for a home at a much reduced multiple. Four-Phase was recently acquired by Motorola, which proceeded to lose its shirt on it. If the initial market reaction to distributed data-processing companies had been more positive, it is possible that some of the early starters might have grown fast enough to survive,just as the earlier wave ofmicrocomputer manufacturers did spawn a few enduring companies like Digital Equipment and Data General. The negative bias ofthe 1975-1976 period gave way to the opposite extreme. It found expression in a venture capital boom that culminated in the second quarter of 1983. The sequence of events is not as clear cut as in the case of RJEITs, but that is only because high technology is not as homogeneous an industryThe same reflexive interaction between stock prices, prevailing bias, and fundamentals can be observed but much more specific knowledge is required to trace the course of events. The availability of venture capital on attractive terms led to a proliferation of new ventures. Every new company needed equipment, as well as inventory so that electronic equipment manufacturers enjoyed a boom, and so did the manufacturers of products and components.The electronics industry is a large customer ofits own products so that the boom was self^reinfbrcing. But the proliferation of companies intensified competition. Industry leaders lost their market position as a new generation of products was introduced because the individuals who were responsible for developing them left their companies and set up new ones. Instead of companies growing in step with their industry, the industry grew by the multiplication of companies. Investors failed to recognize this trend; as a result, technology stocks in general and new issues in particular became substantially overvalued. The new issue boom culminated in the second quarter of 1983. When prices started to decline, fewer issues could be sold and eventually venture capitalists became less venturesome. As fewer companies were formed and the existing ones depleted their cash, the market for technology products softened. Competition intensified and profit margins deteriorated.The process started to feed on itself and the low point has probably still not been reached.*

What distinguishes the conglomerate and REIT sequences from the venture capital boom is that in the first two cases the underlying trend itself was based on the exploitation ofthe investors7 bias while in the third it was not. In the case of conglomerates the idea was to acquire other companies with inflated paper; in the case of REITs the idea was equity leveraging. The idea behind the latest generation of technology products had nothing to do with the stock market. To understand the ups and downs of technology stocks we must know something about the underlying trends in technology; in the case of conglomerates and REITs we need to know little else than the theory ofreflexivity It is important to realize, however, that knowing everything about underlying trends in technology is not sufficient to explain the ups and downs of technology stocks: the reflexive interaction between underlying trends, prevailing biases, and stock prices also needs to be understood. Combining the two kinds of understanding is extremely difficult. Those who want to be familiar with technology must follow the industry closely and continuously; those who want to exploit the divergence between perception and reality must move from group to group.
