Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 51 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 1. -week years. Our next 53-week year will be fiscal year 2027. Significant Accounting Policies 52 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) to months, for hosted services that are priced based on a committed number of transactions where the delivery and consumption of the benefit of the services occur evenly over time, beginning on the date the services associated with the committed transactions are first made available to the customer and continuing through the end of the contractual service term. Over-usage fees and fees based on the actual number of transactions are billed in accordance with contract terms as these fees are incurred and are included in the transaction price of an arrangement as variable consideration. Fees based on a number of transactions, where invoicing is aligned to the pattern of performance, customer benefit and consumption, are typically accounted for utilizing the “as-invoiced” practical expedient. Revenue for subscriptions sold as a fee per period is recognized ratably over the contractual term as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit of the underlying service. When cloud-enabled services are highly integrated and interrelated with on-premise/on-device software, the individual components are not considered distinct and revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription period for which the cloud-enabled services are provided. Subscription-based consulting services and subscription support plans related to those customer arrangements whose revenues we classify as subscription revenues represent stand-ready performance obligations. Revenue from these service and support offerings is recognized ratably over their respective contractual terms and classified as subscription revenue. Licenses for on-premise software may be purchased on a perpetual basis, as a subscription for a fixed period of time, or based on usage for certain of our original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) and royalty agreements. Revenue from non-cloud enabled on-premise licenses without unilateral cancellation rights or monthly renewal options is recognized at the point in time the software is available to the customer, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met, and classified as product revenue on our Consolidated Statements of Income. Revenue from on-premise term license or term licensing arrangements with unilateral cancellation rights or monthly renewal options, and any associated maintenance and support, is classified as subscription revenue. Our services and other revenue is comprised primarily of fees related to project-based consulting and training, as well as maintenance and support for certain on-premise licenses that are recognized at a point in time and our advertising offerings. We sell our project-based consulting contracts on a time-and-materials or fixed-fee basis. These revenues are recognized as the services are performed for time-and-materials contracts and on a relative performance basis for fixed-fee contracts. Training revenues are recognized as the services are performed. Our maintenance and support offerings, which entitle customers, partners and developers to receive desktop product upgrades and enhancements or technical support, depending on the offering, are generally recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Our transaction-based advertising offerings, where fees are based on a number of impressions per month and invoicing is aligned to the pattern of performance, customer benefit and consumption, are typically accounted for utilizing the “as-invoiced” practical expedient. Judgments Our contracts with customers may include promises to transfer multiple products and services. Determining whether products and services are distinct performance obligations to be accounted for separately or combined as part of a single performance obligation may require significant judgment, primarily for our solutions that include both on-premise and/or on-device software licenses and cloud services. We have concluded that certain subscription offerings, which include both on-premise/on-device software licenses and cloud services, represent a single, highly integrated performance obligation. This conclusion reflects the high degree of integration, interdependency and interrelation between the software and the cloud services, such that customers receive the intended benefit only when these components operate together. The nature of our promise to customers is to deliver a complete end-to-end solution, and the intended functionality and workflow efficiencies cannot be obtained from either the software or the cloud services on a standalone basis. Accordingly, revenue for these offerings is recognized ratably over the subscription period during which the cloud services are provided. Standalone selling price is established by maximizing the amount of observable inputs, primarily actual historical selling prices for performance obligations where available, and includes consideration of factors such as go-to-market model and 53 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) years. We evaluated qualitative and quantitative factors to determine the period of amortization, including contract length, renewals, customer life and the useful lives of our products and acquired products. When the expected period of benefit of an asset which would be capitalized is less than one year, we expense the amount as incurred, utilizing the practical expedient. We regularly evaluate whether there have been changes in the underlying assumptions and data used to determine the amortization period. When revenue arrangements include components of third-party products and services, for example in transactions which involve resale, fulfillment or providing advertising impressions to our end customer, we evaluate whether we are the principal, and report revenues on a gross basis, or an agent, and report revenues on a net basis. In this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified products or services before they are transferred to the customer by evaluating indicators such as which party is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the products or services, which party has discretion in establishing price and the underlying terms and conditions between the parties to the transaction. We offer limited rights of return, rebates and price protection of our products under various policies and programs with our distributors, resellers and/or end-user customers. We estimate and record reserves for these programs as variable consideration when estimating transaction price. Returns, rebates and other offsets to transaction price are estimated at contract inception on a portfolio basis and assessed for reasonableness each reporting period when additional information becomes available. General Contract Provisions We maintain revenue reserves for rebates, rights of return and other limited price adjustments. Distributors are allowed limited rights of return of products purchased during the previous quarter. In addition, distributors are allowed to return products that have reached the end of their lives, as defined by us, and for products that are being replaced by new versions. We offer rebates to our distributors, resellers and/or end-user customers. Transaction price is reduced for these amounts based on actual performance against objectives set forth by us for a particular reporting period, such as volume and timely reporting. On a quarterly basis, the amount of revenue that is reserved is calculated based on our historical trends and data specific to each reporting period. The primary method of establishing these reserves is to review historical data from prior periods as a percent of revenue to determine a historical reserve rate. We then apply the historical rate to the current period revenue as a basis for estimating future returns. When necessary, we also provide a specific reserve in excess of portfolio-level estimated requirements. This estimate can be affected by the amount of a particular product in the channel, the rate of sell-through, product plans and other factors. Although our subscription contracts are generally non-cancellable, a limited number of customers have the right to cancel their contracts by providing prior written notice to us of their intent to cancel the remainder of the contract term and consumers have a period of time to terminate certain agreements without penalty. In the event a customer cancels their contract, they are generally not entitled to a refund for prior services we have provided to them. Contracts that include termination rights without substantive penalty are accounted for as contracts only for the committed period. Periods of time after the right of termination are accounted for as optional purchases when they do not represent material rights. For certain of our usage-based license agreements, typically in our royalty and OEM businesses, reporting may be received after the end of a fiscal period. In such instances, we estimate and accrue license revenue. We base our estimates on multiple factors, including historical sales information, seasonality and other business information which may impact our estimates. We do not estimate variable consideration for our sales and usage-based license royalty agreements, consistent with the associated exception for sales and usage-based royalties for the license of intellectual property under the revenue recognition standard. 54 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) to years for computers and other equipment, which includes our corporate jet, years for furniture and fixtures, years for building improvements and years for buildings. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the lesser of the remaining respective lease term or estimated useful life of the asset. 55 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) billion, $ billion and $ million, respectively. 56 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 57 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 2. 58 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ $ $ Cost of revenue Gross profit $ $ $ $ Gross profit as a percentage of revenue % % % % % % % % Fiscal 2024 Revenue $ $ $ $ Cost of revenue Gross profit $ $ $ $ Gross profit as a percentage of revenue % % % % % % % % Fiscal 2023 Revenue $ $ $ $ Cost of revenue Gross profit $ $ $ $ Gross profit as a percentage of revenue % % % % % % % % See the Consolidated Statements of Income for a reconciliation of consolidated gross profit to consolidated income before income taxes. We generally categorize revenue by geographic area based on where the customer manages their utilization of our offerings. $ $ Other Total Americas EMEA APAC Revenue $ $ $ $ $ Digital Experience Publishing and Advertising Total subscription revenue $ $ $ 59 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ $ Business Professionals & Consumers Total Digital Media and Digital Experience subscription revenue $ $ $ Contract Balances Trade Receivables A receivable is recorded when an unconditional right to invoice and receive payment exists, such that only the passage of time is required before payment of consideration is due. Timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. Certain performance obligations may require payment before delivery of the license or service to the customer. Included in trade receivables on the Consolidated Balance Sheets are unbilled receivable balances which have not yet been invoiced, and are typically related to license revenue or services which are delivered prior to invoicing. As of November 28, 2025, the balance of trade receivables, net of allowances for doubtful accounts, was $ billion, inclusive of unbilled receivables of $ million. As of November 29, 2024, the balance of trade receivables, net of allowances for doubtful accounts, was $ billion, inclusive of unbilled receivables of $ million. The allowance for doubtful accounts was $ million and $ million as of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, respectively. Contract Assets A contract asset is recognized when a conditional right to consideration exists and transfer of control has occurred. Contract assets are typically related to subscription and hosted service contracts where the transaction price allocated to the satisfied performance obligations exceeds the value of billings to date. Contract assets are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets for the current portion and other assets for the long-term portion on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We regularly review contract asset balances for impairment, considering factors such as historical experience, credit-worthiness, age of the balance, current economic conditions and a reasonable and supportable forecast of future economic conditions. Contract asset impairments were not material in fiscal 2025 and 2024. Contract assets were $ million and $ million as of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, respectively. Deferred Revenue and Remaining Performance Obligations Deferred revenue primarily consists of billings or payments received in advance of revenue recognition from subscription services, including non-cancellable and non-refundable committed funds and refundable customer deposits. Deferred revenue is recognized as revenue when transfer of control to customers has occurred. Customers are typically invoiced for these agreements in regular installments and revenue is recognized ratably over the contractual subscription period. The deferred revenue balance is influenced by several factors, including the compounding effects of renewals, invoice duration, invoice timing, size and new business linearity within the quarter. Deferred revenue does not represent the total contract value of annual or multi-year non-cancellable subscription agreements. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 to 60 days. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we have determined our contracts generally do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, such as invoicing at the 60 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) billion, which includes $ million of refundable customer deposits. Refundable customer deposits represent arrangements in which the customer has a unilateral cancellation right for which we are obligated to refund amounts paid related to products or services not yet delivered or provided at the time of cancellation on a prorated basis. Arrangements with some of our enterprise customers with non-cancellable and non-refundable committed funds provide options to either renew monthly on-premise term-based licenses or use some or all funds to purchase other Adobe products or services. Non-cancellable and non-refundable committed funds related to these agreements comprised approximately % of the total deferred revenue. As of November 29, 2024, the balance of deferred revenue was $ billion. Significant movements in the deferred revenue balance during the period consisted of increases due to payments received prior to transfer of control of the underlying performance obligations to the customer, which were offset by decreases due to revenue recognized in the period. During the year ended November 28, 2025, approximately $ billion of revenue was recognized that was included in the balance of deferred revenue as of November 29, 2024. Transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations represents contracted revenue that has not yet been recognized, which includes deferred revenue and unbilled amounts that will be recognized as revenue in future periods. Transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations is influenced by several factors, including the timing of renewals and average contract term. We applied practical expedients to exclude amounts related to performance obligations that are billed and recognized as they are delivered, optional purchases that do not represent material rights, sales and usage-based royalties not yet consumed and any estimated amounts of variable consideration that are subject to constraint. Remaining performance obligations were approximately $ billion as of November 28, 2025. Non-cancellable and non-refundable committed funds related to some of our enterprise customer agreements referred to in the paragraph above comprised approximately % of the total remaining performance obligations. Approximately % of the remaining performance obligations, excluding the aforementioned enterprise customer agreements, are expected to be recognized over the next 12 months with the remainder recognized thereafter. Contract Acquisition Costs We recognize an asset for the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if we expect the benefit of those costs to be longer than one year. We have determined that certain sales incentive programs meet the requirements to be capitalized. The costs capitalized are primarily sales commissions paid to our sales force personnel. Capitalized costs may also include portions of fringe benefits and payroll taxes associated with compensation for incremental costs to acquire customer contracts and incentive payments to partners. Capitalized costs to obtain a contract are amortized over the expected period of benefit, which we have determined, based on analysis, to be years. Amortization of capitalized costs are included in sales and marketing expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income. During fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, we amortized $ million, $ million and $ million of capitalized contract acquisition costs into sales and marketing expense, respectively. We did not incur any impairment losses for all periods presented. Capitalized contract acquisition costs were $ million and $ million as of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, of which $ million was long-term and included in other assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets for both periods. The remaining balance of the capitalized costs to obtain contracts was current and included in prepaid expenses and other current assets. Refund Liabilities We record refund liabilities for amounts that may be subject to future refunds, which include sales returns reserves and customer rebates and credits. Refund liabilities are included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the 61 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) million and $ million as of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, respectively. Significant Customers NOTE 3. $ $ $ Cash equivalents: Corporate debt securities Money market funds Time deposits U.S. Treasury securities Total cash equivalents Total cash and cash equivalents Short-term fixed income securities: Corporate debt securities U.S. Treasury securities Total short-term investments Total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments $ $ $ $ 62 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ $ $ Cash equivalents: Corporate debt securities Money market funds Time deposits U.S. Treasury securities Total cash equivalents Total cash and cash equivalents Short-term fixed income securities: Asset-backed securities Corporate debt securities U.S. agency securities U.S. Treasury securities () Total short-term investments () Total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments $ $ $ () $ See Not e 4 f or further information regarding the fair value of our financial instruments. Due between one and two years Total $ 63 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 4. $ $ $ Money market funds Time deposits U.S. Treasury securities Short-term investments: Corporate debt securities U.S. Treasury securities Prepaid expenses and other current assets: Foreign currency derivatives Interest rate swap derivatives Other assets: Deferred compensation plan assets Foreign currency derivatives Interest rate swap derivatives Total assets $ $ $ $ Liabilities: Accrued expenses and other current liabilities: Foreign currency derivatives $ $ $ $ Interest rate swap derivatives Other liabilities: Foreign currency derivatives Total liabilities $ $ $ $ 64 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ $ $ Money market funds Time deposits U.S. Treasury securities Short-term investments: Asset-backed securities Corporate debt securities U.S. agency securities U.S. Treasury securities Prepaid expenses and other current assets: Foreign currency derivatives Other assets: Deferred compensation plan assets Foreign currency derivatives Total assets $ $ $ $ Liabilities: Accrued expenses and other current liabilities: Foreign currency derivatives $ $ $ $ Other liabilities: Foreign currency derivatives Total liabilities $ $ $ $ See Note 3 for further information regarding the fair value of our financial instruments. Our fixed income available-for-sale debt securities consist of high quality, investment grade securities from diverse issuers with a weighted average credit rating of AA. We value these securities based on pricing from independent pricing vendors who use matrix pricing valuation techniques including market approach methodologies that model information generated by market transactions involving identical or comparable assets, as well as discounted cash flow methodologies. Inputs include quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or inputs other than quoted prices that are observable either directly or indirectly in determining fair value, including benchmark yields, issuer spreads off benchmark yields, interest rates and U.S. Treasury or swap curves. We therefore categorize all of our fixed income available-for-sale securities as Level 2. We perform routine procedures such as comparing prices obtained from multiple independent sources to ensure that appropriate fair values are recorded. The fair values of our money market funds, time deposits and deferred compensation plan assets, which consist of money market and other mutual funds, are based on quoted prices in active markets at the measurement date. Our over-the-counter foreign currency and interest rate swap derivatives are valued using pricing models and discounted cash flow methodologies based on observable foreign exchange and interest rate data at the measurement date. 65 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) billion as of November 28, 2025, excluding the associated interest rate swaps, based on observable market prices in less active markets and categorized as Level 2. See Note 17 for further details regarding our debt. NOTE 5. Cash Flow Hedges In countries outside the United States, we transact business in U.S. Dollars and in various other currencies. We may use foreign exchange forward contracts and option contracts to hedge a portion of our forecasted foreign currency denominated revenue and expenses. These foreign exchange contracts, carried at fair value, have maturities of up to months. As of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, gross notional amounts of outstanding cash flow hedges were $ billion and $ billion, respectively, hedging exposures denominated in Euros, Japanese Yen, British Pounds, Indian Rupees, Australian Dollars and Canadian Dollars. In June 2019, we entered into Treasury lock agreements with large financial institutions which fixed benchmark U.S. Treasury rates for an aggregate notional amount of $ billion of our future debt issuance. These derivative instruments hedged the impact of changes in the benchmark interest rate to future interest payments and were settled upon debt issuance in the first quarter of fiscal 2020. We incurred a loss related to the settlement of the instruments which is amortized to interest expense over the term of our debt due February 1, 2030. See Note 17 for further details regarding our debt. As of November 28, 2025, we had net derivative losses on our foreign currency cash flow hedges expected to be recognized within the next months, of which $ million of net losses are expected to be recognized into revenue within the next 12 months and $ million of net losses are expected to be recognized into operating expenses within the next 12 months. We also had net derivative losses on our Treasury lock agreements, of which $ million is expected to be recognized into interest expense within the next 12 months. To receive hedge accounting treatment, all hedging relationships are formally documented at the inception of the hedge, and the hedges must be highly effective in offsetting changes to future cash flows on hedged transactions. We record changes in fair value of these cash flow hedges in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, until the forecasted transaction occurs. When the forecasted transaction affects earnings, we reclassify the related gain or loss on the foreign currency revenue, foreign currency expense or Treasury lock cash flow hedge to revenue, operating expense or interest expense, as applicable. In the event the underlying forecasted transaction does not occur, or it becomes probable that it will not occur, we reclassify the gain or loss on the related cash flow hedge from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to the same income statement line item as the hedged item. We evaluate hedge effectiveness at the inception of the hedge prospectively, and on an ongoing basis both retrospectively and prospectively. If we do not elect hedge accounting, or the contract does not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, the changes in fair value from period to period are recorded in the same income statement line item as the hedged item. For fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, there were no net gains or losses recognized in income relating to hedges of forecasted transactions that did not occur. 66 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) billion notional amount through the respective par call dates for the notes. In exchange, we will receive the fixed rate interest on the notes from the swap counterparties on a semi-annual basis. See Note 17 for further details regarding our debt. The interest rate swaps are designated as fair value hedges. We record changes in fair value on the swaps associated with the hedged risk in interest expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income with a corresponding offset to the value of the senior notes being hedged. Non-Designated Hedges Our derivatives not designated as hedging instruments consist of foreign currency forward contracts that we primarily use to hedge monetary assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies. The changes in fair value of these contracts are recorded to other income (expense), net in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Changes in the fair value of the underlying assets and liabilities associated with the hedged risk are generally offset by the changes in the fair value of the related contracts. As of November 28, 2025, gross notional amounts of outstanding foreign currency forward contracts hedging monetary assets and liabilities were $ million, primarily hedging exposures denominated in Euros, Indian Rupees, Australian Dollars and British Pounds. As of November 29, 2024, gross notional amounts of outstanding contracts were $ million, primarily hedging exposures denominated in Indian Rupees, Australian Dollars, British Pounds and Euros. At November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, the outstanding balance sheet hedging derivatives had maturities of days or less. Fair value asset derivatives are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets for the current portion and other assets for the long-term portion, and fair value liability derivatives are included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities for the current portion and other liabilities for the long-term portion on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. $ $ $ Interest rate swaps Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments: Foreign exchange contracts Total derivatives $ $ $ $ Unrealized ) $ $ () 67 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ () $ Net gain (loss) reclassified from accumulated OCI into income Operating expenses $ () $ $ () Treasury lock Net gain (loss) reclassified from accumulated OCI into income Interest expense $ () $ () $ () Derivatives not designated as hedging relationships: Foreign exchange contracts Other income (expense), net $ $ $ NOTE 6. $ Buildings Building improvements Leasehold improvements Land Furniture and fixtures Capital projects in-progress Total Less: Accumulated depreciation and amortization () () Property and equipment, net $ $ Depreciation and amortization expense of property and equipment for fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 was $ million, $ million and $ million, respectively. $ Other Total Americas EMEA APAC Property and equipment, net $ $ 68 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 7. million, $ million and $ million for fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, respectively. Our operating lease expense includes variable lease costs and is net of sublease income, both of which are not material. During fiscal 2024, we recognized impairment charges of $ million associated with the optimization of our leased facilities, primarily for operating lease right-of-use assets and leasehold improvements, which were recorded as general and administrative expenses. There was no impairment recognized in the other periods presented. $ $ Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for operating lease liabilities $ $ $ The weighted-average remaining lease term and weighted-average discount rate for our operating lease liabilities as of November 28, 2025 were years and %, respectively. 2027 2028 2029 2030 Thereafter Total lease liabilities $ Less: Imputed interest () Present value of lease liabilities $ 69 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 8. $ $ $ Foreign currency translation () () () Balances at November 29, 2024 $ $ $ $ Acquisitions Foreign currency translation Balances at November 28, 2025 $ $ $ $ During the second quarter of fiscal 2025, we completed our annual goodwill impairment test associated with our reporting units and, based on the qualitative assessment, determined there was no impairment of goodwill. We did not identify any events or changes in circumstances since the performance of our annual goodwill impairment test that would require us to perform another goodwill impairment test during the fiscal year. $ () $ $ $ () $ Purchased technology () () Trademarks () () Other () () Other intangibles, net $ $ () $ $ $ () $ Amortization expense related to other intangibles was $ million, $ million and $ million for fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 respectively. Of these amounts, $ million, $ million and $ million was included in cost of sales for fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 respectively. We did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges for all periods presented. Other intangibles are amortized over their estimated useful lives of to years. 2027 2028 2029 2030 Thereafter Total expected amortization expense $ 70 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 9. $ Accrued corporate marketing Sales and use taxes payable Refund liabilities Excise taxes payable Fair value of derivative liabilities Derivative collateral liabilities Other Accrued expenses and other current liabilities $ $ Other primarily includes general business accruals, accrued interest expense and royalties payable. NOTE 10. $ $ Foreign Income before income taxes $ $ $ $ $ Foreign State and local Total current Deferred: United States federal () () () Foreign State and local () () () Total deferred () () () Provision for income taxes $ $ $ 71 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) % as a result of the following: (in millions) 2025 2024 2023 Tax expense computed at U.S. federal statutory rate $ $ $ Effects of non-U.S. operations () () () Tax credits () () () Tax settlements () () () State tax expense, net of federal benefit Stock-based compensation () Acquisition termination fee Other Provision for income taxes $ $ $ Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities $ Credit carryforwards Net operating loss and capital loss carryforwards Accrued liabilities Intangible assets Stock-based compensation Operating lease liabilities Benefits relating to tax positions Total gross deferred tax assets Valuation allowance () () Total deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities: Acquired intangible assets Prepaid expenses Depreciation and amortization Operating lease right-of-use assets Other Total deferred tax liabilities Net deferred tax assets $ $ Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for tax loss and credit carryforwards. As of November 28, 2025, we had federal and state tax credit carryforwards of approximately $ million and $ million, respectively, as well as state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $ million. The majority of the state tax credits can be carried forward indefinitely, and the remaining net operating loss and credit carryforwards will expire in 72 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) billion, most of which will expire in 2029. Certain tax loss and credit carryforwards are subject to limitations and/or are reduced by a valuation allowance. The net carrying amount of such assets is expected to be fully realized. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management determined that it is more likely than not that we will not fully realize certain available tax assets. Deferred tax assets are offset by a valuation allowance to the extent it is more likely than not that they are not expected to be realized. As of November 28, 2025, we continue to maintain a valuation allowance of $ million primarily related to certain U.S. state and federal credits and capital loss carryforwards. For fiscal 2025, the increase in the valuation allowance was $ million. As we repatriate foreign earnings for use in the United States, the distributions will generally be exempt from federal income taxes. As of November 28, 2025, the cumulative amount of foreign earnings considered permanently reinvested upon which taxes have not been provided, and the corresponding unrecognized deferred tax liability, was not material. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes $ Gross increases in unrecognized tax benefits – prior year tax positions Gross decreases in unrecognized tax benefits – prior year tax positions () () Gross increases in unrecognized tax benefits – current year tax positions Lapse of statute of limitations () () Tax settlements () Ending balance $ $ Our policy is to record interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions within the provision for income taxes. As of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, the combined amounts of accrued interest and penalties included in long-term income taxes payable related to tax positions taken on our tax returns were not material. While we file federal, state and local income tax returns globally, our major tax jurisdictions are the United States, California and Ireland. We are subject to the examination of our income tax returns by various domestic and foreign tax authorities with 2021 being the earliest fiscal year open for examination in our major tax jurisdictions. We regularly assess the likelihood of outcomes resulting from examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes and have reserved for potential adjustments that may result. While we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, we cannot provide assurance that the final determination of any of these examinations will not have an adverse effect on our financial position and results of operations. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of our tax assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Although the timing of resolution, settlement and closing of audits is not certain, it is reasonably possible that the underlying unrecognized tax benefits may decrease by up to $ million over the next 12 months. 73 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 11. % of their pretax or after-tax salary, subject to the IRS annual contribution limits. In fiscal 2025, we matched % of the first % of the employee’s eligible compensation. We contributed $ million, $ million and $ million in fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, respectively. We are under no obligation to continue matching future employee contributions and, at our discretion, may change our practices at any time. Deferred Compensation Plan The Adobe Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan is an unfunded, non-qualified, deferred compensation arrangement under which certain executives are able to defer a portion of their annual compensation. Participants may elect to contribute up to % of their base salary and % of other specified compensation, including commissions and bonuses. Members of the Board of Directors are also eligible to participate and are able to defer their directors’ fees and elect cash benefit distributions in the same manner as executives. Additionally, members of the Board are permitted to defer equity awards. Participants are able to elect the payment of benefits to begin on a specified date at least three years after the end of the plan year in which election is made or, with respect to equity awards, vests. For cash benefit elections, distributions are made in cash in the form of a lump sum, or five, ten, or fifteen-year annual installments. For equity award elections, distributions are made in stock in the form of a lump sum payment only. Certain deferred compensation is invested in money market and other mutual funds and subsequently recorded as other assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, with corresponding unrealized holding gains and losses recorded as investment gains (losses) in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Undistributed deferred compensation is recorded as other liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, the invested amounts under the plan totaled $ million and $ million, respectively. As of November 28, 2025 and November 29, 2024, undistributed deferred compensation due to participants totaled $ million and $ million, respectively. NOTE 12. . Certain grants have other vesting periods approved by the Executive Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors (the “ECC”). As of November 28, 2025, we had reserved million shares of our common stock for issuance under our 2019 Plan and had million shares available for grant. Our Performance Share Programs aim to help focus key employees on building stockholder value, provide significant award potential for achieving outstanding company performance and enhance our ability to attract and retain highly talented and competent individuals. The ECC approves the terms of each of our Performance Share Programs, including the award calculation methodology. In January 2025, the ECC approved the 2025 Performance Share Program. Shares outstanding under our 2025, 2024 and 2023 Performance Share Programs may be earned based on the achievement of (i) an objective relative total stockholder return measured over a performance period, as well as (ii) revenue-based financial metrics measured over performance periods. Each type of performance goal is weighted 74 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) % and achievement of each performance goal is determined independently of the other. Shares associated with each performance goal are not awarded until the corresponding performance targets are defined. Performance share awards in each of our 2025, 2024 and 2023 Performance Share Programs will cliff-vest upon the later of (i) the anniversary of the earliest vesting commencement date in the respective Performance Share Program, or (ii) the ECC's certification of the level of achievement of the final performance period in the respective Performance Share Program, contingent upon the participant’s continued service. Participants can earn between % and % of the target number of performance shares. As of November 28, 2025, the shares awarded under our 2025, 2024 and 2023 Performance Share Programs remained outstanding and unvested. Employee Stock Purchase Plan Our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) allows eligible employee participants to purchase shares of our common stock at a discount through payroll deductions. The ESPP consists of offering periods with purchase periods in each offering period. Employees purchase shares in each purchase period at % of the market value of our common stock at either the beginning of the offering period or the end of the purchase period, whichever price is lower. If the market value of our common stock at the end of a purchase period is lower than the market value at the beginning of the offering period, participants are rolled over into the subsequent offering, resulting in a reset of the offering price and the offering period. The ESPP will continue until the earlier of termination by the Board of Directors or the date on which all of the shares available for issuance under the plan have been issued. As of November 28, 2025, we had reserved million shares of our common stock for issuance under the ESPP and approximately million shares remain available for future issuance. Issuance of Shares Upon vesting of restricted stock units and performance shares or purchase of shares under the ESPP, we will issue treasury stock. If treasury stock is not available, common stock will be issued. In order to minimize the impact of ongoing dilution from issuance of shares, we instituted a stock repurchase program. See Note 14 for information regarding our stock repurchase programs. Valuation of Stock-Based Compensation Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. Our restricted stock units are valued based on the fair market value of the award on the grant date. Our performance share awards which are contingent upon achievement of relative total stockholder return are valued using a Monte Carlo Simulation model. Our performance share awards which are contingent upon achievement of revenue-based financial metrics are valued based on the fair market value of the award on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of ESPP purchase rights. The determination of the grant date fair value of our ESPP purchase rights is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, a risk-free interest rate and any expected dividends. 75 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ Awarded $ Released () $ Forfeited () $ Ending outstanding balance $ $ Expected to vest $ $ The weighted average grant date fair values of restricted stock units granted during fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 were $, $ and $, respectively. The total fair value of restricted stock units vested during fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 was $ billion, $ billion and $ billion, respectively. Summary of Performance Shares $ Awarded $ Released () $ Forfeited () $ Ending outstanding balance $ $ Expected to vest $ $ Shares released during fiscal 2025 resulted from overall payout at % of target for the 2022 Performance Share Program, as certified by the ECC in the first quarter of fiscal 2025. The weighted average grant date fair values of performance share awards granted during fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 were $, $ and $, respectively. The total fair value of performance share awards vested during fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 was $ million, $ million and $ million, respectively. Summary of Employee Stock Purchase Plan Shares Employees purchased million shares at an average price of $, million shares at an average price of $, and million shares at an average price of $ for fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The intrinsic value of shares purchased during fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 was $ million, $ million and $ million, respectively. The intrinsic value is calculated as the difference between the market value on the date of purchase and the purchase price of the shares. Compensation Costs We recognize the estimated compensation costs of restricted stock units, net of estimated forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the entire award, which is generally the vesting period. The estimated compensation cost is based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. 76 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) billion of unrecognized compensation cost, adjusted for estimated forfeitures, related to unvested stock-based awards and purchase rights which will be recognized over a weighted average period of years. Total unrecognized compensation cost will be adjusted for future changes in estimated forfeitures. $ $ Research and development Sales and marketing General and administrative Total (1) $ $ $ _________________________________________ (1) During fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, we recorded tax benefits related to stock-based compensation costs of $ million, $ million and $ million, respectively. NOTE 13. ) $ $ $ Net unrealized gains / losses on derivative instruments designated as hedging instruments () (1) () Cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments () () Total accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes $ () $ () $ $ () _________________________________________ Taxes related to each component of other comprehensive income (loss) were immaterial for the fiscal years presented. 77 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 14. billion in our common stock through March 14, 2028. In September 2025, we entered into a stock repurchase arrangement with a large financial institution to execute up to $ billion in open market repurchases, which remained partially outstanding as of November 28, 2025. Upon completion of this arrangement, $ billion remains under our March 2024 stock repurchase authority. $ Open market repurchases Total $ Fiscal 2024 Accelerated share repurchase agreements $ Other structured stock repurchases (1) Total $ Fiscal 2023 Accelerated share repurchase agreements $ Other structured stock repurchases Total $ _________________________________________ (1) During fiscal 2024, we received the final delivery of shares under a structured stock repurchase agreement entered into in fiscal 2023. Under the terms of our accelerated share repurchase agreements, financial institutions agree to deliver a portion of shares to us at contract inception and the remaining shares at settlement. The total number of shares delivered and average purchase price paid per share are determined upon settlement based on the Volume Weighted Average Price (“VWAP”) over the term of the contract, less an agreed upon discount. Under the terms of our other structured stock repurchase agreements, financial institutions agree to deliver shares to us at monthly intervals during the respective contract terms, and the number of shares delivered each month are determined based on the total notional amount of the contracts, the number of trading days in the intervals and the VWAP during the intervals, less an agreed upon discount. 78 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 15. $ $ Shares used to compute basic net income per share Dilutive potential common shares from stock plans and programs Shares used to compute diluted net income per share Basic net income per share $ $ $ Diluted net income per share $ $ $ Anti-dilutive potential common shares NOTE 16. 2027 2028 2029 2030 Thereafter Total $ Acquisitions On November 18, 2025, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Semrush Holdings, Inc., a publicly held brand visibility platform company, for approximately $ billion of cash consideration. The transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions and is expected to close in the first half of fiscal 2026. Royalties We have royalty commitments associated with the licensing of certain offerings and products. Royalty expense is generally based on a dollar amount per unit or a percentage of the underlying revenue. Royalty expense, which was recorded in 79 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) million, $ million and $ million in fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023, respectively. Indemnifications In the ordinary course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope to our customers and channel partners against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and from time to time, we are subject to claims by our customers under these indemnification provisions. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving at our request in such capacity. The indemnification period covers all pertinent events and occurrences during the officer’s or director’s lifetime. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited; however, we have director and officer insurance coverage that reduces our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. We believe the estimated fair value of these indemnification agreements in excess of applicable insurance coverage is minimal. Legal Proceedings We are subject to legal proceedings, claims, including claims relating to intellectual property, consumer protection, commercial, employment and other matters, and investigations, including government investigations, that arise in the ordinary course of our business. Some of these disputes, legal proceedings and investigations may include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We consider all claims on a quarterly basis in accordance with GAAP and based on known facts assess whether potential losses are considered reasonably possible or probable and estimable. Based upon this assessment, we then evaluate disclosure requirements and whether to accrue for such claims in our financial statements. This determination is then reviewed and discussed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We make a provision for a liability when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. These provisions are reviewed at least quarterly and adjusted to reflect the impacts of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel and other information and events pertaining to a particular case. As of November 28, 2025, accrued provisions for legal proceedings were immaterial. Unless otherwise specifically disclosed in this note, we have determined that no disclosure is required related to any claim against us because: (a) there is not a reasonable possibility that a loss exceeding amounts already recognized (if any) may be incurred with respect to such claim; (b) a reasonably possible loss or range of loss cannot be estimated; or (c) such estimate is immaterial. All legal costs associated with litigation are expensed as incurred. Litigation is inherently unpredictable. However, we believe that we have valid defenses with respect to the legal matters pending against us. It is possible, nevertheless, that our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows could be negatively affected by an unfavorable resolution of one or more of such proceedings, claims or investigations. Since June 2022, we have been cooperating with the Federal Trade Commission (the “FTC”) staff in response to a Civil Investigative Demand seeking information regarding our disclosure and subscription cancellation practices relative to the Restore Online Shoppers’ Confidence Act (“ROSCA”). In November 2023, the FTC staff asserted that they had the authority to enter into consent negotiations to determine if a settlement regarding their investigation of these issues could be reached. On March 20, 2024, we were informed that the FTC had voted to authorize a filing of the case. The FTC then referred the case to the Department of Justice (the “DOJ”), and on June 17, 2024, the DOJ filed a civil complaint in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, naming Adobe and certain of our employees as defendants. The complaint alleges that Adobe failed to clearly and conspicuously disclose material terms, failed to obtain express informed consent and failed to provide a simple cancellation mechanism regarding our disclosure and subscription cancellation practices in violation of ROSCA and the FTC Act. The DOJ is seeking injunctive relief, civil penalties, equitable monetary relief and other relief. On October 7, 2024, we filed a motion to dismiss the DOJ’s civil complaint, and that motion was fully briefed as of December 23, 2024. On May 2, 2025, the Court denied our motion to dismiss the complaint. The discovery phase is ongoing. The defense or resolution of this matter could involve significant monetary costs or penalties and have a significant impact on our financial results and operations. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in negotiating a favorable settlement or in 80 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 81 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 17. % 2025 Notes February 2020 February 2025 % $ $ % 2025 Notes January 2015 February 2025 % % 2027 Notes February 2020 February 2027 % % 2027 Notes April 2024 April 2027 % % 2028 Notes January 2025 January 2028 % % 2029 Notes April 2024 April 2029 % % 2030 Notes January 2025 January 2030 % % 2030 Notes February 2020 February 2030 % % 2034 Notes April 2024 April 2034 % % 2035 Notes January 2025 January 2035 % Total debt outstanding, at par $ $ Less: Current portion of debt, at par () Fair value of interest rate swaps Unamortized discount and debt issuance costs () () Carrying value of long-term debt $ $ Current portion of debt, at par $ $ Unamortized discount and debt issuance costs () Carrying value of current debt $ $ Senior Notes In January 2025, we issued $ million of senior notes due January 17, 2028, $ million of senior notes due January 17, 2030 and $ million of senior notes due January 17, 2035. Our total proceeds were approximately $ billion, net of an issuance discount of $ million and total issuance costs of $ million. In February 2025, $ billion of senior notes became due and were repaid. Discounts and issuance costs on our senior notes are amortized to interest expense over the terms of the respective notes using the effective interest method. Interest on the notes issued in February 2020 is payable semi-annually, in arrears, on February 1 and August 1. Interest on the notes issued in April 2024 is payable semi-annually, in arrears, on April 4 and October 4. Interest on the notes issued in January 2025 is payable semi-annually, in arrears, on January 17 and July 17. During fiscal 2025, we entered into interest rate swaps related to certain of our senior notes. The interest rate swaps effectively convert the fixed interest rates on the notes to floating interest rates based on the SOFR OIS. Under the terms of the swaps, we will pay quarterly interest at the daily compounded SOFR OIS plus a fixed number of basis points on the notional amount through the respective par call dates for the notes. In exchange, we will receive the fixed rate interest on the notes from the swap counterparties on a semi-annual basis. The fair value of the interest rate swaps is included in the carrying value of our debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 5 for further details regarding our interest rate swap derivatives. Our senior notes rank equally with our other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness, and do not contain financial covenants. We may redeem the notes at any time, subject to a make-whole premium. For the senior notes issued in February 2020, upon the occurrence of certain change of control triggering events, we may be required to repurchase the notes, at a price equal to % of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the 82 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) $ billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility. The Revolving Credit Agreement provides for loans to Adobe and certain of its subsidiaries that may be designated from time to time as additional borrowers. Pursuant to the terms of the Revolving Credit Agreement, we may, subject to the agreement of lenders to provide additional commitments, obtain up to an additional $ million in commitments, for a maximum aggregate commitment of $ billion. At our election, loans under the Revolving Credit Agreement will bear interest at either (i) term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), plus a margin, (ii) adjusted daily SOFR, plus a margin, (iii) alternative currency rate, plus a margin, or (iv) base rate, which is defined as the highest of (a) the federal funds rate plus %, (b) the agent’s prime rate, or (c) term SOFR plus %. The margin for term SOFR, adjusted daily SOFR and alternative currency rate loans is based on our debt ratings, and ranges from % to %. In addition, facility fees determined according to our debt ratings are payable on the aggregate commitments, regardless of usage, quarterly in an amount ranging from % to % per annum. We are permitted to permanently reduce the aggregate commitment under the Revolving Credit Agreement at any time. Subject to certain conditions stated in the Revolving Credit Agreement, Adobe and any of its subsidiaries designated as additional borrowers may borrow, prepay and re-borrow amounts at any time during the term of the Revolving Credit Agreement. The Revolving Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, affirmative and negative covenants, including events of default and indemnification provisions in favor of the lenders. The negative covenants include restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and indebtedness, certain merger transactions, dispositions and other matters, all subject to certain exceptions. The facility will terminate and all amounts owing thereunder will be due and payable on the maturity date unless (a) the commitments are terminated earlier upon the occurrence of certain events, including an event of default, or (b) the maturity date is further extended upon our request, subject to the agreement of the lenders. As of November 28, 2025, there were outstanding borrowings under this Revolving Credit Agreement. Commercial Paper Program In September 2023, we established a commercial paper program under which we may issue unsecured commercial paper up to a total of $ billion outstanding at any time, with maturities of up to days from the date of issue. The net proceeds from the issuance of commercial paper are expected to be used for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, stock repurchases, refinancing indebtedness or any other general corporate purposes. As of November 28, 2025, there were outstanding borrowings under the commercial paper program. 83 Table of Contents ADOBE INC. NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) NOTE 18. ) $ () $ () Investment gains (losses), net: Realized investment gains $ $ $ Unrealized investment gains (losses), net Investment gains (losses), net $ $ $ Other income (expense), net: Interest income $ $ $ Foreign exchange gains (losses) () () () Realized losses on fixed income investments () () () Other Other income (expense), net $ $ $ Non-operating income (expense), net $ $ $ 84 Table of Contents