12
CALENDAR SPREADS
T he focus of this chapter is on calendar spread trades,also known
ashorizontal spread tradesortime spread trades.These trades work
best on stocks whose price moves within a reasonably narrow
range.Volatile stocks that can move up or down 15 percent within the
time frame ofone month are generally not suitable for calendar spreads.
In a basic calendar spread, you buy a distant month option and sell a
closer month option.Both options have the same strike price,which is
typically selected to be the one nearest the price of the stock at the time
the trade is initiated.When things progress well in a calendar spread,the
short option ultimately expires worthless while the stock price remains
essentially unchanged. This leaves the long option with a reduced cost
basis,which can be either sold for profit or used for further trading.
Calendar spreads can be created with either call options or with put
options.For purposes of this introductory discussion,we assume that
call options are used.A comment on using put options for a calendar
spread will be included at the end.
Suppose that XYZ has traded in a relatively narrow price range over the
past few months and you expect that trend to continue. In early May,
XYZ is trading at $34.70,which makes the $35 strike price a good choice
for a calendar spread.Here is a typical calendar spread trade on XYZ:
Trade:Buy 1 Nov 35 call for $3.50 per share and sell 1 Jun 35
call for $1.30 per share.
Cost = $220.
Maximum risk = $220.
See Figure 12-1 for a risk graph that depicts this trade.
87

Today: 39 days left
26 days left
13 days left
Expiry: 0 days left
–300 –200 –100 0
Suppose that six weeks later,at the June options expiration date,XYZis
still at $34.70.The short Jun 35 call will expire worthless.This leaves the
Nov 35 call with a cost basis of$2.20 per share.Using an options calcu-
lator, we can estimate the value of the Nov 35 call at that time to be
$3per share.Ifon the Monday after the June expiration date,the Nov 35
is sold for that price, then a profit of $80 is achieved [(3.00 – 2.20) ×
100 = 80].That gain is also seen in the risk graph of Figure 12-1.The
profit here represents a gain of 36 percent based on the original risk of
$220.Note that this gain is achieved in about six weeks.
To understand how this profit was made,let’s look at the details of the
trade.The Jun 35 call was sold for $1.20 per share,which was all time
value.Because the price of XYZ was under $35 at the expiration date,
the Jun 35 call expired worthless, and all of that time value is gained.
The Nov 35 call lost only $.50 of time value as its price decreased from
88
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND
ecirP
kcotS
04
03
Figure 12-1

$3.50 per share to $3 per share at the June expiration. Our profit was
derived from the fact that the November option was less sensitive to the
loss of time value than was the June option.Thus,the calendar spread
profited by gaining $1.30 per share from the Jun 35 call, while losing
only $.50 per share in the Nov 35 call. This resulted in a net profit of
$.80 per share [1.30 – .50 = .80].
As an alternative to selling the Nov 35 call following the June expiration
date,it may be worthwhile to hold this option and establish a new cal-
endar spread by selling the Jul 35 call.This illustrates one of the poten-
tial benefits of calendar spreads,namely the ability to continue selling
front-month options to reduce the cost basis ofthe longer-term option.
Let’s examine this new calendar spread.
Following the expiration ofthe Jun 35 call,you are holding one Nov 35
call with an effective cost basis of $2.20 per share.Then sell one Jul 35
call for $1 per share.(Note that this is less than received for the Jun 35 call
because there would be only about four weeks until the July expiration
date.) Now,your current net debit and maximum risk is $120 [(2.20 –
1.00)×100 = 120].
At the July expiration date,suppose that XYZ is again at the same price
of $34.70.The short Jul 35 call would expire worthless.This leaves the
Nov 35 call with an even lower cost basis of $1.20 per share.Using an
options calculator, we can estimate the value of the Nov 35 call to be
$2per share.Ifon the Monday after the July expiration date,the Nov 35
call is sold for that price,a profit of $80 is achieved.That represents a
gain of 67 percent based on the current risk of $120.
The preceding results assume a highly idealized scenario in which the
price of XYZ at the June expiration date is $34.70,exactly the same as
when the trade was initiated in early May.Furthermore,ifthe trade was
continued by selling the Jul 35 call,the stock price was assumed to be
again at $34.70 at the July expiration.To have a more realistic view of
calendar spreads,we need to see what happens when the stock price is
not the same at expiration as it was when the trade was initiated.
Suppose that the price of XYZ has fallen to $33.75 at the June expira-
tion date.The short Jun 35 call will again expire worthless.An options
calculator estimates that the value ofthe Nov 35 call at that time would
89
Chapter 12 Calendar Spreads

be $2.50 per share. Selling the Nov 35 call at that value returns a $30
profit [(2.50 – 2.20) × 100 = 30]. Even though the price of XYZ has
fallen,there is still a gain on the trade of9 percent based on the original
risk of$220.The lower return in this scenario is a result ofnot only the
lost time value in the Nov 35 call,but also lost intrinsic value due to the
lower stock price.
How low can the price ofXYZ be at the June expiration and still achieve
a profit? An options calculator shows that the break-even point is a
stock price of about $33, as seen in Figure 12-1. If the stock price is
below that level at the June expiration date, the calendar spread will
show a net loss.For example,ifXYZ is at $31,the net loss will be about
$80.The maximum that can be lost is the original cost of$220 to estab-
lish the spread.A loss close to the maximum is incurred if XYZ drops
to $25 or less.
Even if XYZ is below $33 at the June expiration and the spread fails to
show a profit at that time,it might still be worthwhile to continue hold-
ing the Nov 35 call with a reduced cost basis of $2.20 per share. This
makes it easier to achieve profitability if the stock price eventually
begins to rise.
Consider another scenario in which the price of XYZ has risen to
$36.50 at the June expiration date.Then,the short Jun 35 call will have
a value of $1.50 per share (all intrinsic value). An options calculator
estimates the value of the Nov 35 call to be $4 per share. To close the
trade near the June expiration,it is necessary to buy back the Jun 35 call
and sell the Nov 35 call for a net of$2.50 per share [4.00 – 1.50 = 2.50].
This represents a profit of $30 [(2.50 – 2.20) ×100 = 30],for a 14 per-
cent gain on the original risk of $220.
In this scenario where XYZ is above $35 at the June expiration,the fact
that the Jun 35 call did not expire worthless was offset by the increased
value of the Nov 35 call.With an even higher price of XYZ at expira-
tion, the value of the Nov 35 call would also be even higher, but that
gain would be offset by an increased value of the Jun 35 call.
How high can the price of XYZ be at the June expiration and still have
the calendar spread achieve a profit? An options calculator shows that
the break-even point is a stock price ofabout $38,as seen in Figure 12-1.
90
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

At that level,the Jun 35 call would have a value of $3 per share,while
the Nov 35 call would have a value of$5.20 per share.Closing out both
options would produce $220 [(5.20 – 3.00) ×100 = 220],which exactly
offsets the original cost ofthe spread trade.Ifthe price ofXYZ is above
$38 at expiration,the price of the Jun 25 call will have increased more
than the Nov 35 call. This results in a net difference of less than $220
and hence a loss on the trade.If XYZ reaches $42,the calendar spread
will show a net loss of about $100 at expiration.
The Rollout Maneuver
As previously mentioned, a primary feature of the calendar spread is
the ability to continue establishing a new calendar spread each month.
In the ideal scenario,as illustrated previously,the front-month option
is allowed to expire worthless, thereby leaving the long-term option
with a reduced cost basis.Then the next-month option with the same
strike can be sold to establish the new calendar spread.
The process of converting the old calendar spread into a new calendar
spread does not necessarily require waiting until the expiration date
arrives.Frequently,the conversion is best accomplished by buying back
the front-month option before expiration while simultaneously selling
the next-month option.This maneuver is called the rollout.
The rollout maneuver is a necessity when the short option is in-the-
money as expiration nears.In this situation,the short option must be
bought back to avoid an assignment.It may also be advantageous to use
a rollout even when the short option is out-of-the-money.What are the
circumstances under which a rollout should be considered?
Let’s first look at the case where the short option is in-the-money as
expiration nears.An in-the-money option will often have lost almost all
of its time value with 8 to 10 days still remaining until expiration. In
this circumstance,there is a good reason to proceed immediately with a
roll into the next month.There is little to be gained from holding the
front-month option until expiration,while the next-month option that
you hope to sell is undergoing some significant price erosion.The goal
is to perform the rollout when the differential between the front-month
91
Chapter 12 Calendar Spreads

option and the next-month option is maximized.This frequently occurs
before the expiration date.
The case in which the short option is out-of-the-money is a bit differ-
ent.The market makers will often keep the ask price for an out-of-the-
money option abnormally high,even going into the day of expiration.
They may keep the ask price at $0.15 per share or higher with only a few
days remaining until expiration, so as to make it expensive for you to
eliminate the risk of your short option.In this circumstance,it is often
best to proceed with the rollout several days early and not wait until
expiration just to collect that extra $0.15 per share.Here again,the goal
is to perform the rollout when the differential between the front-month
option and the next-month optionis greatest.
Comments
The objective of a calendar spread trade is to capture the time value in
a front-month option,which will decay faster than the time value in a
more distant month option. To exploit this difference, it is generally
wise to initially have at least one month between the expiration of the
long option and that of the short option. This allows for at least one
new calendar spread to be established after the first expiration date.
A calendar spread is only profitable if the stock price at the options
expiration date is within a fairly narrow range. The risk graph of
Figure12-1 is fairly typical for a calendar spread.As seen in that exam-
ple,the range ofprofitability at the June expiration was $33 to $38.This
means that the price of XYZ at expiration needs to be within a price
range that is neither 9 percent above nor 6 percent below the $35 strike
price to achieve a profit.This emphasizes the importance of analyzing
the expected trading range of a stock being considered for a calendar
spread.
The preceding discussion focused on calendar spread trades using call
options. Calendar spread trades using put options can work equally
well.Often the decision as to whether to use calls or puts for a calendar
spread depends upon a more likely direction of drift in the stock price.
Generally speaking, a call spread is used when the expected drift is
92
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

toward a higher stock price,whereas a put spread is used when a down-
ward drift in the stock price is considered more likely.
When should a calendar spread be abandoned? Although it is true that
you can never lose more than your original debit in a calendar spread
trade,it may nevertheless be prudent to exit early to limit your loss.A
reasonable criterion is to exit a calendar spread when the loss reaches
50 percent of the amount paid to establish the trade.
When should you take a profit and terminate the calendar spread rather
than establish a new calendar in the next month? Anytime you can real-
ize at least 50 percent of the maximum possible profit in a calendar
spread,consider closing the trade for a profit.
93
Chapter 12 Calendar Spreads

This page intentionally left blank