17
MARRIED PUTS
E very time you buy a stock, you are exposing your investment
capital to substantial risk. Fortunately, there is an inexpensive
way to protect your investment while waiting for the stock to
move up. This protection is established through an “arranged mar-
riage” between your stock and an appropriate put option. In options
terminology,this is known as the married put strategy.
As soon as you buy a stock,you are particularly anxious as you wait for
it to begin moving upward. Obviously, you bought the stock because
you believe its price is going up and you also believe that this upward
move is going to happen soon.Even for disciplined investors,it is diffi-
cult to get rid ofa nonperforming stock within the first few weeks after
it is purchased.This means admitting you were either wrong about the
stock or wrong about the timing, or both. So, all too frequently, we
watch the price ofour newly purchased stock drift downward as we try
to assure ourselves that this is only a temporary setback and soon our
rosy evaluation of this stock will be validated.
Many investors think that the solution to this situation is to use a stop
loss order, which is set to trigger when the stock price moves down
about 7 percent to 10 percent below the purchase price of the stock.
There are two major problems with the stop loss approach: (1) If the
stock gaps down,say 15 percent to 20 percent or more on some unex-
pected bad news, your stop loss will be executed at that much lower
level.(2) Soon after you purchase the stock,it pulls back just enough to
trigger the stop loss and then rebounds to a 15 percent gain.You will
have been taken out of the trade and miss the opportunity to make a
nice profit.
131

The married put strategy offers a way to avoid the problems posed by
the stop loss order.It will allow you to hold your stock for several weeks
(or longer) without concern for a pullback,while waiting for the antic-
ipated move up in price.There are several variations ofthe married put
strategy,but the one described here is the simplest and least expensive
to employ.
The basic idea of the married put strategy is to buy an appropriate put
option at the same time you purchase stock.Typically,a put is selected
that will provide several weeks of protection against a downside move
in the stock price,while you comfortably wait for the expected uptrend
to begin.As the put nears its expiration date,some decision will have to
be made about continuing to hold the stock.We examine several sce-
narios to see how an appropriate decision is reached.
Let’s look at an example to see how the married put strategy works.
In late August, you decide to buy 100 shares of XYZ at $31 per share,
because you are convinced that this stock will soon be headed toward
$35 and perhaps much higher.For protection you also buy the Sept 30
put at $.80 per share.
Trade:Buy 100 shares of XYZ at $31 a share and buy 1 contract
of the Sept 30 put at $.80 per share.
Cost = (100 ×31) + (100 ×.8) = $3,180.
Max risk = $180.
See Figure 17-1 for a risk graph that depicts this trade.
Note that the maximum risk on this combination of the stock and the
married put is only $180.Compare that with a maximum risk of$3,100
if the protective put is not in place.
How do we determine that the maximum risk is $180? If the stock is
anywhere below $30 at any time before the September options expira-
tion date,you can elect to exercise your option and sell your stock for
$30 per share.That represents a loss of $1 per share on 100 shares for a
total of $100. We must also include the expense of buying the put
option at $.80 per share for a cost of$80 for the one contract.Thus,we
obtain the maximum risk of $180 [100 + 80 = 180].
132
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Today: 21 days left
14 days left
7 days left
Expiry: 0 days left
–200 –100 0 100 200 300
If some unexpected bad news on XYZ surfaces overnight and the
stock opens at $25 on the following day, those who own 100 shares
of stock without the married put will suffer an immediate loss of
$600. Moreover, things might get even worse as the price of XYZ
falls even further in the next few days. Do you sell or hang on with
the hope of some recovery? This difficult question is of no concern if
you own the Sept 30 put. You know that you cannot lose more than
$180 no matter what happens to the stock.You can comfortably wait
tosee whether the bad news is reversed and the stock recovers to show
a profit.
How is the appropriate put selected for protection of the stock? First,
decide on the expiration month and then choose a strike price.
My recommendation for the choice of expiration month is the current
month if there are at least three weeks remaining until expiration. If
133
Chapter 17 Married Puts
ecirP
kcotS
53
43
33
23
13
03
92
82
72
62
52
42
32
Figure 17-1

there are less than three weeks until expiration, use a put that expires
the following month. In the latter case, you are going to have at least
five weeks and possibly as many as seven weeks of protection. Avoid
going out any further in time, because the options will be too expen-
sive. The general idea here is to allow your stock between three and
seven weeks to start showing the strength you are expecting.
As for the strike price,it is usually best to select the nearest strike price
that is below the stock price, as illustrated in the preceding example.
This way,you will only be paying for time value and that should not be
too expensive since the option is never more than seven weeks from
expiration.The exception to this choice is when the stock price is just
below the next higher strike price.Then consider going to that higher
strike option so as to provide sufficient protection. In the preceding
example,suppose the purchase price for the XYZ stock had been $34.
Then, the Sept 35 put at $1.90 per share might be a better choice to
avoid $4 of risk in the stock price.The general idea here is to provide
some protection ofthe purchase price ofyour stock without paying too
much for the put.
What happens when the expiration date for the protective put arrives?
This is when you will need to make a hard decision as to how you feel
about this stock that interested you several weeks ago.You have had a
chance to “test drive”this stock without concern.Now you must decide
whether you really want to own it for the long term.
If the stock price has gone up,the decision will be easy.Before the put
expires, initiate a stop loss order to protect some of your gain in the
stock price. (Note that a stop loss order makes more sense now that
there is some profit to act as a cushion.) This leaves you in a reasonable
position to hold the stock for additional gains.
If the stock price has gone down,you have a choice of actions:(1) Get
rid of the stock by exercising the put option,which enables you to sell
the stock at the strike price. (2) If you want to continue holding
this stock because it seems to have found its bottom,sell the put for a
profit,thereby lowering the cost basis for the stock.
If the stock price has gone sideways, you might want to give serious
thought to selling the stock and also selling the put ifit has any residual
134
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

value.To justify a decision to continue holding the stock,you will need
to consider another married put. This means the stock will need to
make an even larger gain to offset the expense of two protective puts—
not usually an attractivescenario.
Comments
Here are some variations of the married put strategy:
■ There are times to employ this strategy other than when you
first buy a stock.Suppose you already own a stock that has pro-
vided a nice profit,but there is an upcoming special event
(earnings report,FDA approval,court decision,and so on) that
could send it into a steep decline.Use a married put to get past
the special event.Then you will be much better placed to
decide whether you should continue to hold the stock.
■ For more-volatile stocks,the protective put that you would like
to own may be rather expensive.You can reduce the cost by
using a vertical Bear Put Spread instead of a simple protective
put.To create the spread,buy the put you want for protection
and then sell the one at the next-lower strike to offset the
expense.There is risk with this approach,because the vertical
bear spread can provide only limited protection.
■ Another way to help finance the cost of the protective put is to
sell a call at a strike price above the purchase price of the stock.
This combination,known as a “collar,”provides the desired
protection,but it caps your upside profit.In Chapters 18,
“Collars,”and 19,“Advanced Collars,”these collar trades are
discussed in detail.
135
Chapter 17 Married Puts

This page intentionally left blank