1
INTRODUCTION
Why Options?
W hy should someone who invests or speculates in the market
learn to use options? The simple answer is that options can
greatly enhance your profit from stocks and/or provide the
means to protect your portfolio.The goal of this chapter is to familiar-
ize the beginner with call and put options, and demonstrate some of
the basic ways that options are used.
Suppose you buy a stock for $30 a share and it goes to $33. The stock
price has risen by 10 percent and accordingly you have a 10 percent prof-
it. That’s nice! If instead of buying the stock, you buy an appropriate
option,you might make a 100 percent profit or even more for the same
10 percent rise in the stock price.That’s better than nice.That’s fantastic!
Of course,there are risks associated with options,just as there are risks
with any investment. You need to understand the risks as well as the
advantages of options in order to optimize your results.
Throughout this book, the use of call and put options are illustrated
through a variety of examples. For simplicity, the focus is on equity
options—that is,options associated with individual stocks.With minor
variations, the same concepts apply to most other kinds of options,
such as those associated with an index such as the Dow or those that
represent an industry such as the semiconductor industry.
The Basic Concept of Options
To understand the basic concept of options,let’s start with a simplified
look at how they work.
3

An (equity) option is linked to a specific stock.The price of the option
is much less than the price of the underlying stock, which is a major
reason for the attractiveness of options. If the price of the stock
changes,the price of the option will also change,although by a smaller
amount.As the price of a stock goes through its daily ups and downs,
the price of an associated option will undergo related fluctuations.
The price of an option can be viewed and followed in much the same
way as a stock price.There are numerous online services,including the
data feed for your brokerage account,that provide the prices ofoptions.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) offers a free online serv-
ice for quotes on option prices that are 20 minutes delayed.
For a call option, if the stock price goes up, the option price also
increases.If the stock pricegoes down,the price of the call decreases.
For aput option,ifthe stock price goes down,the option price increases.
Ifthe stock price goes up,the price ofthe put decreases.
This sounds like owning a call option is similar to holding a long posi-
tion in the stock,because you have the potential to make a profit when
the stock price goes up.And owning a put option is similar to holding
a short position in the stock,because you have the potential to make a
profit when the stock price goes down.In a rough sense,this analogy is
true,but there are some significantdifferences.
Major Differences Between Stocks and Options
Leverage
Options typically cost only a fraction of the stock price. If you think
XYZ stock,currently at $49 per share,is going up in price,you can pur-
chase 100 shares at a cost of $4,900. If instead you buy 1 call option
contract (1 contract represents 100 shares ofstock),you might pay only
$2 per share for a total of only $200 to participate in an upward price
movement of XYZ.
Analogously,if you think XYZ is going down in price,you could short
100 shares ofstock,but that creates a margin responsibility in your bro-
kerage account,which can become costly ifXYZ goes up.Ifinstead you
4
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

buy one put contract,you might pay just $2 per share for a total ofonly
$200 to participate in a downward price movement of XYZ.
Time Limitation
One reason options are cheap is that they are time limited.A long or
short position involving stock can be held indefinitely, but an option
expires on a fixed date.The expiration date is typically the third Friday
of the expiration month designated in the option contract.When you
buy an option,you can select from various expiration months,includ-
ing the current month as well as other months going out possibly as far
as two years.
The longer you want to hold an option,the more expensive it will be.If
a price of $1 per share applies to an option expiring in two months,a
similar option expiring in four months might be priced at $2 per share.
For 12 months,the price could be as much as $7 per share,but even this
would typically be a small fraction of the stock price.
Another important aspect of being time limited is that the value of an
option will decrease with time when there is no change in the stock
price.Ifyou buy an option for $1 per share with two months until expi-
ration,for example,it might be worth only $.65 with one month to go
if the stock price has not gone up.This is one of the risks of owning an
option,namely that its value diminishes over time when the stock price
remains unchanged.
Price Movement
As the stock price changes,the option price also changes,but by a lesser
amount. How closely the change in the option price matches the
change in the stock price depends on the reference price designated in
the option contract.This reference price is called thestrike price.
When you decide to purchase an option, there will be several strike
prices from which to make a selection.For most stocks,the strike prices
ofits options are set at $5 increments within the broad trading range of
the stock.For some lower- and medium-priced stocks,strike prices are
offered in increments of $2.50, whereas options on some high-priced
stocks only have strike price increments of $10.
5
Chapter 1 Introduction

There is a terminology used by options traders to describe the relative
relationship between the stock price and the strike price ofan option.If
the strike price of either a call or a put is close to the price of the stock,
the option is said to beat-the-money.Ifthe strike price ofa call (put) is
above (below) the stock price,the option is said to beout-of-the-money.
If the strike price of a call (put) is below (above) the stock price, the
option is said to be in-the-money.
For an at-the-money option,the price ofthe option will change by about
50 percent ofthe amount ofchange in the stock price.For an out-of-the
money option,the price ofthe option will change by less than 50 percent
of the change in the stock price. The price of an in-the-money option
will move by more than 50 percent ofthe change in the stock price.
For example,suppose XYZ stock is priced at $49 and a call option with
a $50 strike price is purchased for $2 per share.Ifthe price ofXYZ stock
rises by $2 up to $51 soon after purchasing the option,the price of the
call would typically increase by about $1, raising its price by up to
$3per share.Suppose instead,a call option with a $55 strike price was
purchased for $.75 per share.Then the same $2 move in the stock price
might increase the price of the call by only $.20,up to $.95 per share.
On the other hand, a call option with a $45 strike price and a cost of
$5per share might see an increase in the price ofthe call by as much as
$1.60,up to $6.60 per share.
Of course,if XYZ fell $2 from $49 down to $47,the call option with a
$50 strike price could be expected to lose about $1 per share,reducing
its price from $2 down to $1.This illustrates how the leverage ofoptions
works in both directions.
Financial Risk
When you buyan option,your maximum risk is limited to your origi-
nal cost of that option.The worst outcome is that you hold the option
until expiration, at which time it has become worthless because the
stock price failed to move in a beneficial manner.
For example,ifyou buy one option contract for a price of$2 per share,
your cost is $200 (2 × 100 = 200). This is the most that you can lose.
Compare that dollar risk with the risk of either owning or shorting
6
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

100shares ofstock.When the stock price undergoes a substantial move
against your long or short position in the stock,the dollar loss will be
much greater than the cost of a call or put option.
A major risk with options is that you invest heavily by purchasing
numerous contracts and then allow them to expire worthless.This rep-
resents a 100 percent loss on a significant investment. Of course, it is
rarely necessary to lose all of your original investment when the stock
does not move as expected.Typically,you can sell your options before
expiration and recover some part of youroriginal cost.
A Detailed Explanation of Options
Additional insight into options from both the owner and seller view-
points is provided in the more detailed explanation that follows here.
The Option Contract
An (equity) option represents a contract between a buyer and a seller.
This contract is an agreement concerning the buying or selling of a
stock at a reference price during a stipulated time frame.You will never
see any written document for this contract,just as you do not see actu-
al shares of stock that you purchase in your brokerage account. The
existence ofthe option contract is implied as soon as you buy or sell an
option through your broker.
We will continually refer to the buying and selling of options. In case
you are wondering where all this buying and selling takes place, there
are exchanges for trading options similar to the exchanges for trading
stocks.Your broker routes your order to buy or sell an option to one of
those option exchanges,just like he sends your order to buy or sell stock
to a stock exchange.
There are rights and obligations associated with an option contract,
which need to be understood. Options associated with individual
stocks trade in a manner called “American style,” which permits the
owner of the option to exercise the rights of the contract at any time
before the option expires. To better comprehend the implications of
an option being exercised, we examine the call option and the put
7
Chapter 1 Introduction

option from the viewpoints of both the buyer (owner) and the seller
(writer).
The Call Option
The buyer (owner) ofa call option has the right to purchase 100 shares
ofstock at the strike price designated in the contract.This right to pur-
chase can be exercised anytime before the contract expires. Typically,
the time frame of the option extends through the third Friday of the
expiration month stipulated in the contract.
Theseller(writer)ofacalloptionhastheobligationtosupply100shares
of stockforpurchaseatthestrikeprice,if sorequestedbytheownerof
the option.This obligation to supply the stock may be required at any
timebeforethecontractexpires.Asapracticalmatter,if thestockprice
isbelowthestrikeprice,thestockisalmostnever“called”awayfromthe
seller.Evenwhenthestockpricegoesabovethestrikeprice,theassign-
mentofacallrarelyhappensuntilneartheexpirationdate.
BUYINGACALLOPTION
The motivation to buy a call option could be based on your expectation
that the price of XYZ stock will soon rise above its current level. Let’s
set up a possible trade,clarify its risk,and examine some possible out-
comes resulting from the trade:
■ Trade.In early February,with XYZ trading at $49,you decide
to buy one call contract to benefit from the expected rise in the
stock price.To allow a reasonable amount of time for XYZ to
advance,you select a contract with an April expiration.You also
select a strike price of $50.Option prices are quoted on a per-
share basis,and let’s suppose that this call option costs $2 per
share.Because the option covers 100 shares of stock,this means
you pay $200 to own this particular call contract.
In the jargon of options,you are “long one XYZ Apr 50 call.”
Now you have the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock at
$50 per share anytime before the close of trading on the third
Friday ofApril.
8
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

This right to purchase XYZ stock for $50 per share does not
look so good at the moment,because the stock is priced in the
market at only $49.Indeed,why have you paid $2 per share for
something that presently has no intrinsic value? Because the
expression “time is money”is most appropriate as it applies to
options.You paid $2 per share as a cheap way to participate in
the movement of the price of XYZ stock until the call expires in
two months.
■ Risk.Your risk on this trade is limited to the $200 paid for one
call contract.
■ Outcome.Let’s examine a few scenarios to see how this trade
might work out:
1. Suppose your faith in XYZ stock is validated as its price
reaches $54 by the end of March.Now your right to pur-
chase XYZ at $50 looks good,and you decide it is time to
take your profit.Should you call your broker and tell him to
exercise your right to purchase this stock at $50? No,because
you will do much better if you just sell the option.The
option you bought for $2 is likely to now be worth $5.50.So,
the contract for which you paid $200 can now be sold for
$550,giving you a nice $350 profit.That represents a
175percent profit on the option,whereas the stock price has
risen only 15 percent.
Why is this option worth $5.50 when its intrinsic value is
only $4 (54 – 50 =4)? Again,because “time is money,”and
the person who buys your call option is paying the extra
$1.50 per share over its intrinsic value in hopes that XYZ
stock will go even higher before the April expiration.
Let’s see why selling the option is more profitable than
exercising it.If you had exercised your option to buy XYZ
stock at $50 and then immediately sold the stock at $54,
thatwould be a $400 gain on the stock,less the $200 cost
of the option for a net profit of only $200.So,exercising the
option yields only a 100 percent profit as compared with
the175 percent profit received from selling the option.Also,
9
Chapter 1 Introduction

selling the option avoids any issue about having enough
cashin your brokerage account to take ownership of the
stock.
2. In contrast to the happy Scenario 1,let’s see what happens in
the unfortunate case when XYZ is under $50 when the April
options expiration date arrives.If you remained stubbornly
optimistic until the end,you would have seen the value of
your option diminish until it expired worthless.In this
worst-case situation,you would lose all of the $200 that you
originally paid for the option.Usually,there is no need to
incur such a complete loss.If XYZ is still around $49 in early
April with only a couple of weeks left until expiration,you
might conclude that the chance for success looks remote.
Then sell your option for whatever value remains.Suppose
that you could sell the option for $1 per share and thereby
close the trade for a 50 percent loss.The decision to limit
your loss on a long option trade to50 percent is a reasonable
exit strategy.
SELLINGACALLOPTION
Suppose that you own 100 shares of ZYX stock, which at the current
price of $67 is above where you bought it,but now seems to be stalled.
It would be nice to make a bit more money on this stock, and you
would be quite happy to part with it at $70 per share. This could be
your motivation to sell a call. Selling a call would immediately bring
some cash into your brokerage account, and if ultimately you are
required to give up your stock for $70 per share, that is an additional
gain.Let’s set up a possible trade,clarify its risk,and examine some pos-
sible outcomes resulting from the trade:
■ Trade.In early February,you decide to sell one call contract on
ZYX.You pick the $70 strike price and a March expiration.The
March option is selected so as to have an early resolution as to
whether your stock will be retained or sold.Suppose that you
are able to sell the March call for $2 per share.Because the
contract covers 100 shares of stock,that brings in $200,which
is yours to keep.
10
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

In the jargon of options,you are “short one ZYX Mar 70 call.”
Also,this particular combination of owning a stock and selling
a call is referred to as a covered call position.Chapter 14,
“Covered Calls,”discusses this type of trade more fully.
You now have the obligation to give up your stock at $70 a
share if someone exercises that right against you before the
close of trading on the third Friday of March.Does this mean
your stock will be called away as soon as its price is a penny
over $70? No,because under most circumstances you only need
worry about losing your stock within a few days of the expira-
tion date.Why? As illustrated previously,until near the expira-
tion date,the owner of the option will always profit more by
selling it than by exercising it.Of course,as the expiration date
is reached with ZYX above $70,someone is ultimately going to
exercise their option and call away your stock.
■ Risk.Your risk here is the usual risk of owning a stock,because
its price could drop significantly.To a small degree,this risk is
offset by the decrease in value of the short call.
■ Outcome.Let’s examine a few scenarios to see how this trade
might work out:
1. At expiration,ZYX is at $71.Your stock is called away for
$70.You have made $2 per share for the call that you sold,
and the stock is being sold for $3 more than the $67 it was
worth when you sold the option.Thus,you have a $500 gain
since the time that you initiated the option trade.
Things look a little different if ZYX is $74 at expiration.
Your stock will still be taken away at $70,and you have
exactly the same $500 gain that you had when ZYX closed
at $71.But in this case,you could have made $700 on the
stock if you had not sold the option.Of course,that $700
gain is unrealized unless you actually sell the stock at $74.
One benefit of the covered call trade is that it forces some
discipline upon you to take a profit and get rid of a stock
that possibly has little upside left in it.
11
Chapter 1 Introduction

2. If ZYX is slightly above $70 as expiration nears,you might
decide that you do not want to part with your stock.Then
you must buy back the short call.If ZYX is hovering around
$71 on the expiration day,you can probably buy back the
call option for a bit more than $1 a share (even at expiration
it will cost you a little more than its intrinsic value).This
gives you a profit of the difference between the $2 that you
took in from the sale of the call less your approximate cost of
$1 from buying it back.Now you get to keep your stock,but
if its price soon begins to fall,you may regret the decision to
keep it.
3. If ZYX is only $69 at expiration,the call that you sold
expires worthless.You already have the $2 from selling the
option,and you also retain your stock.The cost basis for
your stock has been lowered by $2 per share.Now you can
repeat the process in the next month.If you were able to
continue bringing in $200 every month with this covered call
strategy,that represents a 36 percent annual return on a
$67stock that does not even need to go up in price.If the
stock goes up gradually and each month you can sell a call at
a higher strike price,things are even better.
4. Suppose that ZYX has pulled back to $64 at expiration.Now
your stock has lost $3 per share from the time that you sold
the call.This unpleasant situation is somewhat relieved by
the $2 per share received for the call that you sold.In this
case,your net loss isonly $1 per share.
The Put Option
The buyer (owner) of a put option has the right to sell 100 shares of
stock at the strike price designated in the contract.This right to sell can
be exercised anytime before the contract expires. Typically, the time
frame of the option extends through the third Friday of the expiration
month stipulated in the contract.
The seller (writer) of a put option has the obligation to buy 100 shares
of stock at the strike price,if so requested by the owner of the option.
12
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

This obligation to purchase the stock may be required at any time
before the contract expires. As a practical matter, the stock is never
“put” to seller if the stock price is above the strike price. Even if the
stock price is below the strike price,the put assignment typically does
not happen until near the expiration date.
BUYINGAPUTOPTION
The motivation to buy a put option could be based on your expectation
that the price ofXYZ stock will soon fall from its current level.Let’s set
up a possible trade, clarify its risk, and examine some possible out-
comes resulting from the trade:
■ Trade.In early February,with XYZ trading at $39,you decide
to buy one put contract to benefit from the expected fall in the
stock price.Because you expect XYZ to decline following an
earnings report in early March,you choose a March option.
You also decide on a strike price of $40.Let’s say this put
option costs $3 per share.Because the option covers 100 shares
of stock,this means that you pay $300 to become the owner of
this particular put contract.You are now “long one XYZ Mar 40
put.”This gives you the right to sell 100 shares of XYZ stock at
$40 per share anytime before the close of trading on the third
Friday of March.This right to sell at $40 per share is a slight
improvement over its current price of $39;however,that gain
of $1 per share is offset by the $3 per share paid for the option.
Why have you paid $3 for something that has an intrinsic value
of only $1? Again,“time is money,”and you have paid an extra
$2 per share of time value in order to play XYZ for a downward
move until the put expires in March.
■ Risk.Your risk on this trade is limited to the $300 paid for one
put contract.
■ Outcome.Let’s examine a few scenarios to see how this trade
might work out:
1. The earnings report for XYZ is indeed weak and the stock
sinks to $34.Now your rightto sell XYZ at $40 per share
looks good.Does it matter that you do not own any XYZ
13
Chapter 1 Introduction

stock to sell? No,because if you are ready to take your profit,
all you need do is sell the option.The option you bought for
$3 is likely to now be worth $7.So,the contract for which
you paid $300 can now be sold for $700,giving you a nice
$400 profit.That represents a 133 percent profit on the
option,whereas the stock dropped only about 13 percent.
Why is the option worth $7 when its intrinsic value is only
$6 (40 – 34 = 6)? As said before,time is money,and the
person who buys your put option for $7 is paying an extra
$1 per share over its intrinsic value in hopes that XYZ will go
even lower before the March expiration.
Let’s see why selling the option is better than exercising it.To
assign the option,you would first need to buy the stock at
$34 per share and then exercise your right to have someone
buy the stock at $40 per share.Your gain would be $600 on
the stock less the $300 you paid for the option,giving a net
profit of only $300.So,exercising the option yields a
100percent profit as compared with the 133 percent profit
received from selling the option.
2. In contrast to the happy Scenario 1,let’s see what happens in
the case when the price of XYZ stock is still at $39 when the
March options expiration date arrives.The earnings report
failed to negatively impact the stock price and you have
stubbornly refused to accept that outcome until the end.
Then you would have seen the value of your option shrink
from $3 down to its intrinsic value of $1.You could then sell
the option for $100,which represents a $200 loss based on
the $300 paid for the option.
SELLINGAPUTOPTION
Suppose that you shorted 100 shares of ZYX stock when it was $65 a
share. It has fallen to $62 in early February, but seems to be stalled at
that price level.You do have a $300 profit,but your original goal was to
ride this stock down to $60 for a profit of$500.This could be the moti-
vation for selling a put option.Selling a put would immediately bring
some cash into your brokerage account, and if ultimately you are
14
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

required to close your short position at $60 per share,that is an addi-
tional gain. Let’s set up a possible trade, clarify its risk, and examine
some possible outcomes resulting from the trade:
■ Trade.In February,you decide to sell a March contract so as to
have an early resolution on the position of being short ZYX
stock.You find that you can sell the March $60 put for $2 per
share,which brings $200 into your brokerage account.You are
now “short one Mar 60 put.”This means that you might be
required to buy 100 shares of ZYX at $60 per share at anytime
before the March options expiration date.For all practical pur-
poses,this is not going to happen unless ZYX is below $60 as
the expiration date nears.If you are required to buy the stock at
$60,your broker will immediately use those shares to close
your short position in ZYX,which you initiated at $65.
■ Risk.Your risk here is the usual risk of being short a stock,
because its price could rise significantly.To a small degree,this
risk is offset by the decrease in value of the short put.
■ Outcome.Let’s examine some scenarios to see how this trade
might work out:
1. Suppose that ZYX is still at $62 when the March expiration
date arrives.Because the stock price is above the strike price
at expiration,the option expires worthless.Now you can keep
the $200 that you received from selling the put option and
your short position in the stock remains in place.Thus,you
have managed to make some additional profit on this short
position,even though the stock is right where it was when
you sold the put.
2. If the price of ZYX is at $59 at expiration in March,you
would be required to buy 100 shares of the stock at $60 per
share.These purchased shares would immediately close your
short position in ZYX.Now you have achieved your original
goal of riding the stock down from $65 to $60,plus you have
brought in an extra $2 per share from selling the put.This
yields $500 from the short sale of the stock plus $200 from
the option for a total profit of $700.
15
Chapter 1 Introduction

Comments
The discussion in this chapter focused only on some of the more com-
mon uses of call and put options.A variety of strategies use options in
other ways to enhance the opportunity for making a profit under the
appropriate circumstances. Many of those strategies are presented in
this book.
Time is money.This phrase should always be in the back of your mind
as you deal with options. Remember that the value of an option
decreases in time when everything else remains unchanged.When you
own an option, time is your enemy. When you have sold an option,
time is your friend.
Before you can begin trading options,you need to consult your broker
to determine what types of option trading will be allowed in your
account. The types of allowed trades will depend on the size of
youraccount as well as whether it is a retirement account.Upon receiv-
ing approval,you will be able to do options trading in your brokerage
account much like you do stock trading,either by directing your broker
to place orders or by online transactions done by yourself.
16
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND