26*
DAY TRADING AN
INDEX WITH OPTIONS
I f you are ready to try your hand at day trading an index using
options,here is an overview of how to get started.Some ideas will
be included on what index to use as well as the basic tools you will
need to pursue this endeavor.
A large number of indexes have options.For day trading purposes,you
want an index with highly liquid options,and you want an index with
a range of daily price movement that is sufficient to create opportuni-
ties for profit.A favorite index ofmany traders that meets these criteria
is the S&P 100,better known as the OEX.
The OEX has an average daily price range of about 4 points.Seldom is
the daily price range less than 2 points, and during every month you
can expect to see several days with a price range of 7 to 8 points.Days
with a price range of 10 points or more are relatively infrequent. An
OEX price movement of 5 to 6 points is typically accompanied by a
Dow price movement of about 100 points.
The most conservative way to day trade the OEX is simply to buy a call
or a put, depending on which way you anticipate the index price to
move. The recommended option is the front-month, slightly out-of-
the-money call or put.Depending on how close it is to the expiration
date,the price of this option will be in the range of $2 to $7.The mag-
nitude ofthe delta ofthis option typically is about 0.40 to 0.50.Keep in
mind that as the index price moves in the desired direction,the magni-
tude of the delta of the option will increase, thereby improving your
potential for profit.
201

A reasonable goal is to capture about 60 percent ofthe price movement
of the index for the day.On a typical day when there is a 4-point price
movement in the OEX,you are looking to participate in a movement of
about 2.5 points.With a delta of .40,this suggests that you are looking
for a $1 per share gain in the price of the option; however, with slip-
page,the gain is more likely to be about $.80 to $.90 per share.If you
are trading 10 contracts, this translates to a profit of $800 to $900.
Commissions will diminish that profit by $50 or less.
Ideally,you would like to limit the average loss on your losing trades to
less than the average profit on your winning trades.Realistically,this is
difficult to achieve.Ifyou set your stops too tight in an effort to restrict
loss,you will be prematurely taken out of many trades that would ulti-
mately become profitable. For the typical 4-point price movement in
the OEX, a good goal is to hold the loss on your losing 10 contract
trades to $1,000,including commissions.
Based on the average profit and loss per trade suggested previously,you
will need to have at least two winning trades for every losing trade to
make day trading the OEX a worthwhile venture.For every three trades
involving a 4-point move in the OEX,you need two winners for a profit
of $1,500 [2 × (800 – 50) = 1,500] to offset one loser with a loss of
$1,000.That produces a net gain of $500 on the three trades.
This projected return of $500 on every three trades based on a 10 con-
tract trade can be adjusted to suit your tolerance for risk by using a dif-
ferent number of contracts. Using a different lot size does bring some
other issues into consideration.With fewer contracts,there is the advan-
tage of quicker and better fills on your trades,but the disadvantage that
commissions represent a larger percentage of the trade. With signifi-
cantly more contracts,some liquidity may be lost,but theeffect ofcom-
missions will be diminished. On those days where the price range is
significantly more or less than the typical 4 points,theexpected profits
and losses on the trades must be appropriately scaled.
It should be emphasized that “day trading” means that you are not
going to hold any position overnight. Of course, you can decide that
you want to hold a position overnight or even for several days,but then
you are into a whole new philosophy of trading. If you do decide to
202
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

hold a position overnight,be aware that you are vulnerable to substan-
tially more risk.
The most important element in the day trading approach described
previously is achieving the 2:1 ratio of winning trades to losing trades.
Accomplishing this goal will depend on your skill in reading market
direction,as well as your skill at entering and exiting trades.Developing
these skills will require time and practice.
Some basic tools can prove useful in helping you to develop the neces-
sary skills for day trading.First of all,you need a trading platform that
enables you to view all the important data in real time. You must be
able to simultaneously view the option price and the index price in real
time. The trading platform must also enable you to quickly issue an
order to either enter or exit a trade.In day trading,it is imperative that
you are able to see what is happening in real time and be able to act
swiftly on your observations.
Your visualization of the index price movement should be in the form
of a chart.It is best if you can follow the index price movement on at
least two charts whosebars are based on different time frames.A com-
mon choice is one chart with 1-minute bars and another chart with
10-minute bars.The 1-minute bar chart is useful in deciding on precise
entry and exit points,whereas the 10-minute bar chart helps you to rec-
ognize general trends in the price movement of the index.
Your charts should be supplemented with some technical indicators
that will assist you in determining a trend in the index price. While
gaining experience,you can experiment with a variety oftechnical indi-
cators,but almost all day traders use some type of stochastic oscillator
in their analysis of short-term market movement.
Probably the most common stochastic oscillator is the (14,3,3) slow
stochastic. This is the default setting on many data services that offer
stochastic analysis. You should set up this oscillator on both your
1-minute bar chart and your 10-minute bar chart. Loosely speaking,
the stochastic oscillator is used to indicate when a sustained trend in
one direction (up or down) is likely to reverse and go the other way.
The day trader uses these indications ofa change in direction as poten-
tial entry and exit points for trading. The most reliable indications
203
Chapter 26 Day Trading an Index with Options

occur when the stochastics of both the 1-minute and 10-minute charts
agree on a change in price direction.
Even though you may be day trading the OEX, it is wise to always be
aware of the general trend in the market on a longer time frame. For
example, if the market is in a strong bullish trend, you should give
some preference to bullish day trades in the OEX. Keep in mind that
favorite cliché of traders—“the trend is your friend.” During periods
when the market is choppy,day trading can be particularly challenging
because you are more likely to react to a false signal ofmarket direction.
The discussion here is not sufficient for you to immediately step into
the role of a successful OEX day trader,but it should be useful in get-
ting you started in the right direction. It is highly recommended that
you begin by practice trading and keeping a journal of your “paper
trades.”This will help you to get a feel for how the option price reacts
in response to changes in the index price. You also want to become
comfortable with reading the signals provided by the stochastic oscilla-
tor before you attempt any real trades.
Comments
Day trading is not for everyone.It requires lots of discipline and a per-
sonality that can handle the rollercoaster of emotions that come from
watching minute-by-minute market movement.
If you plan to do some day trading, check with your broker about
requirements for your account.The basic requirement of all brokers is
that you maintain an account balance of $25,000, but some brokers
may have additional restrictions.
204
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND