28*
THEORY OF
MAXIMUM PAIN
A lot ofmystery surrounds the theory ofmaximum pain.This the-
ory, more familiarly known as max pain or strike price pegging,
attempts to explain the curious price movement of a stock (or
index) that is sometimes observed during the last few days leading up
to an option’s expiration date.
Briefly, max pain refers to the situation in which the price of a stock
seems to lock in on an option strike price as expiration nears.During
the last few days,the stock price will vacillate around the strike price as
if tethered by an elastic cord. The targeted strike price is typically the
one that has the largest amount of open interest in the about-to-expire
options.
A variety of explanations have been offered for the max pain effect.
Some explanations describe a grand conspiracy on the part ofthe mar-
ket makers to manipulate the stock price.It is suggested that the market
makers collectively agree to steer the stock price to a level that would
cause the largest number of at-the-money options to expire worthless.
This explanation further assumes that it will be the retail traders left
holding all ofthose worthless options at expiration,and hence the mar-
ket makers exert the maximum financial pain on the investing public.
This interpretation appears to be the source of the name for the max
pain effect.
Because the max pain effect does seems to focus on a strike price,elab-
orate systems have been devised to predict an exact target price (some-
where near a strike price) at expiration.These predictions are based on
211

algorithms that account for the amount of open interest associated
with each ofthe front-month options.There are fee-based services that
will provide these predicted target prices on any stock or index.Suffice
to say that these predictions are frequently inaccurate.
Every month,as the option’s expiration date draws near,you will find
some stocks that exhibit fluctuations consistent with the max pain
concept.But,there will be other stocks,apparently motivated by simi-
lar circumstances,where the price action is decidedly not like that sug-
gested by max pain.
There has yet to be found a reliable theory that can consistently predict
when the max pain effect will be observed and what price will be tar-
geted.There is,however,a rational explanation as to what is happening
when the max pain effect is observed. And this explanation does not
require any grand conspiracy of the market makers. It only requires
that some market makerstake individual actions consistent with a log-
ical,low-risk strategy to exploit the special circumstances that prevail as
options expire.
It should be clear that the max pain effect will always be overridden by
any breaking news that alters the fundamental outlook for a stock.If a
company releases an earnings warning during options expiration week,
it will be difficult to target a strike price while every major institution is
dumping huge volumes of the stock.
Let’s consider a more reasonable scenario to understand the market
dynamics that produce the max pain effect without the need for any
conspiracy. Suppose that XYZ is trading at $26 a few days before the
expiration date of the front-month options.Also,suppose that there is
a fairly high level of open interest in the about-to-expire calls and puts
with a $25 strike price.
If the price of XYZ dips to $25.50,those retail traders who are long the
front-month $25 calls will sense that time is working against them
and be inclined to quickly sell their options to salvage some portion
of their original investment.The market maker,who is well aware that
the option owner is running out of time, will post a discounted bid
price of only $.45 per share for the about-to-expire $25 call option.
212
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

The retail trader sells his option to the market maker for $.45 per share.
Now the market maker is long the $25 call with a short lifetime.To pro-
tect himself,the market maker shorts 100 shares ofXYZ at $25.50.This
combination places him in a no-lose position with the potential for a
windfall profit.
If the stock has gone up in price as expiration is reached, the market
maker’s short position in the stock will have lost money. But, he can
exercise his long call to buy 100 shares of stock at $25 per share and
cover his short stock position. In fact, there will be a profit of $5 per
contract [(25.50 – 25 – .45) ×100 = 5],which may seem miniscule until
you multiply that $5 by the hundreds of contracts handled by the
market maker.
A windfall profit for the market maker occurs if XYZ incurs a signifi-
cant drop in price. Suppose that XYZ has fallen to $24 at expiration.
The market maker loses all of the $.45 per share that he paid for
the long call, which expires worthless. On the other hand, he makes
a profit of $1.50 per share on his short stock position, for a nice net
profit of $105 per contract [(25.50 – 24 – .45) ×100 = 105].
What does this have to do with max pain? When the market maker
shorts XYZ stock,a downward pressure is exerted on the stock price.If
there is a large open interest in the $25 calls,the market maker could be
shorting a large amount ofstock.This action will tend to force the price
of XYZ toward and possibly below $25.
Now let’s turn our attention to another market maker who sees the
price of XYZ fall to $24.50.He posts a discounted bid price of $.45 per
share for the about-to-expire $25 puts. Those retail traders who are
long these $25 puts rush to sell their options to salvage some portion of
their original investment.
As soon as the market maker buys the put, he also buys 100 shares of
XYZstockat$24.50.Asbefore,thiscombinationplaceshiminano-lose
positionwiththepotentialforawindfallprofit.
Ifthe stock has gone down in price as expiration is reached,the market
maker’s long position in the stock will have lost money. But he can
exercise his long put and force someone to buy his 100 shares of stock
at $25 per share.Again,this produces a profit of$5 per contract,which
213
Chapter 28 Theory ofMaximum Pain

can add up to a tidy sum if it is repeated over hundreds of contracts
handled by the market maker.
A windfall profit for this market maker occurs if XYZ makes a signifi-
cant gain in price.Suppose that XYZ has risen to $26 at expiration.The
market maker loses all of the $.45 per share that he paid for the long
put, which expires worthless. On the other hand, he makes a profit
of $1.50 per share on his long stock position for a nice net profit of
$105 per contract.
This market maker also contributes to the max pain effect by buying
XYZ stock,which exerts an upward pressure on the stock price.Ifthere
is a large open interest in the $25 puts,the market maker could be buy-
ing a large amount of stock.This action will tend to force the price of
XYZ toward and possibly above $25.
Now we see that these two market makers,while acting independently,
are actually working against each other in a dynamical manner that will
tend to keep the stock price of XYZ close to $25.If there are large and
roughly equal open interest numbers for both the $25 puts and $25
calls,this can lead to a high volume of buying and selling stock around
the $25 level. The result of this back and forth action is a stock price
that fluctuates around $25.
The previously described low-risk strategy used by the market makers
during expiration week can also be employed by sophisticated retail
traders. The retail trader will not be able to create a no-lose position,
because he will not be able to buy the option at the discounted bid
price.Instead,he will have to buy the option near the ask price,which
will include some time value.If the trader is skillful in simultaneously
buying the option and entering the corresponding stock position, the
risk is limited to the time value in the option. Once established, this
low-risk position has the potential for a windfall profit when the stock
price moves in theright direction.
214
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND