29*
IMPLIED VOLATILITY
AND THE BLACK-
SCHOLES FORMULA
T he concept of implied volatility (IV) is important in evaluating
an options trade. Experienced options traders have learned to
appreciate that the implied volatility of an option suggests
whether the option is overpriced or underpriced. To fully understand
the meaning of implied volatility, you need some basic knowledge of
the theory of options pricing,as expressed in the famous Black-Scholes
formula.
The goal of this chapter is to provide some background and insight
into the Black-Scholes formula and how IV is determined from that
formula.Also,the use of IV data in trading is briefly discussed.
Historical Background
Back in the early 1970s when options on U.S. stocks were first intro-
duced,everyone was guessing as to how they should be priced.Clearly,
the option price should be related to the underlying stock price, but
beyond that things were vague.At the time,there were three men on the
forefront of theoretical finance trying to solve this problem, namely
Fischer Black,Myron Scholes,and Robert Merton.
The work of these men led to an important formula for the pricing of
options. This result became known as the Black-Scholes formula,
because it first appeared in a 1973 paper authored by Black and Scholes.
215

Twenty-four years later,in 1997,Merton and Scholes were awarded the
Nobel Prize in Economics for their groundbreaking work on the pric-
ing of options.If Black had not passed away,he would have shared in
the award.
Derivation of the Black-Scholes Formula
This section is intended to provide an overview of how the Black-
Scholes formula is derived without presenting any of the mathematical
details. Those readers who find this discussion a bit too technical can
skip to the next section.
■ Part 1.The first part of the theory is the development of an
equation to describe the movement of stock prices.The equa-
tion contains two fundamental components that contribute to
the change in the price of a stock.One component represents a
simple return on your investment,which is proportional to the
price of the stock.This component is something like com-
pound interest earned on the money invested in buying the
stock,and it always acts to increase the stock price.The other
component is the random influence arising from minute-by-
minute news,rumors,and spurious actions that create interest
or disinterest in owning the stock.This random component can
either positively affect the price change (due to good news),or
negatively affect the price change (due to bad news).When a
stock price drops,it is because the random component is suffi-
ciently negative to overwhelm the simple return component.
The sensitivity of the random component to minute-by-minute
events is measured by a parameter called the volatility.This
volatility parameter is different for each stock.For example,a
recently released IPO stock often exhibits high volatility as it
moves up or down 30 percent in reaction to a minor news item.
Contrast this with the low volatility nature of a staid Dow stock
that moves up or down only 3 percent on what appears to be
important news.More about this volatility parameter will
follow later.
216
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

■ Part 2.The second part of the theory represents the essential
contribution of Black,Scholes,and Merton.They proposed an
idealized portfolio that is long several shares of stock and short
one call option.The objective in this hypothetical portfolio is
to continually adjust the number of shares of stock so as to
counteract the random influence component described in
Part1.This requires an ongoing,second-by-second buying
andselling of stock,which could only be achieved in an
idealized setting.
Next,it is reasoned that if this idealized portfolio is continually
adjusted so as to be independent of random influences,it is
guaranteed to earn a profit.In an efficient U.S.market,the
bestguaranteed profit is derived from a U.S.treasury bill or
similar instrument whose return is based on the interest rate set
by the Fed.The important conclusion to this reasoning is that
the short-term increase in the value of the idealized portfolio
must be exactly the same as the return from a U.S.treasury bill
held over the same period of time.
■ Part 3.In the final stage of the theory,the elements described
in Parts 1 and 2 are linked together mathematically.Then,
through the application of stochastic calculus (an extension of
classical calculus that accounts for random effects),there
emerges a partial differential equation that governs the price of
the call option in the idealized portfolio.Solving that partial
differential equation yields the “Black-Scholes formula”for
calculating the price of a call option.
Application of the Black-Scholes Formula
Now let’s discuss how the Black-Scholes formula might be used. The
formula is a complicated mathematical expression and is not shown
here.It is not essential to see the formula to appreciate how it is used.
To actually calculate something from the formula requires using one of
the many special calculators or software programs that has the formula
programmed into its operation.
217
Chapter 29 Implied Volatility and the Black-Scholes Formula

To calculate the current price of a call option, the Black-Scholes for-
mula requires the input of five pieces of information, namely (1) the
current price of the stock, (2) the strike price of the option, (3) the
amount of time remaining until the option expires, (4) the current
interest rate,and (5) the value of the volatility parameter for the stock,
as described previously in Part 1.
Each of the required pieces of information is readily available, except
for the value ofthe volatility parameter.There have been a multitude of
ideas proposed as to how the value of this volatility parameter should
be determined.
One possible choice for the value ofthe volatility parameter is the“his-
torical volatility”associated with the stock.The historical volatility of a
stock is calculated as the annualized standard deviation of the daily
closing stock price relative to a mean value.
Using the value of historical volatility along with the other four pieces
of input information,the Black-Scholes formula (via an options calcu-
lator) will provide a theoretical price for the option. As might be
expected,the theoretically predicted price obtained by this calculation
rarely agrees with the actual option price observed in the marketplace.
This suggests that historical volatility is not the appropriate volatility
parameter to accurately determine the price of an option.
Even though there is a disagreement between the actual option price
and that predicted by the Black-Scholes formula using historical
volatility of the stock, this discrepancy can be viewed as useful infor-
mation.Ifwe think ofthe predicted price as some sort ofnormal value
based on an annualized average volatility,the actual price ofthe option
can be viewed as either expensive or cheap by comparison.When the
actual option price appears to be undervalued,we may want to buy it.
If it appears to be overvalued, we may want to structure a trade in
which that option is sold.
Implied Volatility
The application ofthe Black-Scholes formula as described in the last sec-
tion is not the modern way in which it is used.As pointed out,the weak
link in applying the formula is the choice of the volatility parameter.
218
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Tocircumvent this issue,a different way to apply the formula was devised
in which the volatility parameter was given a new interpretation.
Rather than trying to guess what value to use for the volatility parameter,
the modern approach is to insert the actual option price from the mar-
ketplace into the Black-Scholes formula,and then let the formula tell us
what the volatility should be.The value ofthe volatility parameter deter-
mined in this manner is called the implied volatility,or IV for short.
A major drawback in using the historical volatility to calculate theoret-
ical options prices is that the same parameter value is used for all strike
prices and all expiration months.In the modern approach of inserting
actual option prices into the Black-Scholes formula,it is possible to cal-
culate an IV for each individual option. These calculations reveal that
the IV is generally quite different for each option.Also,the value of the
IV can change quickly in response to changing circumstances sur-
rounding the stock.
Applications of Implied Volatility
How is this IV used in trading? To begin with,we can compare the IV
figure to the historical volatility.Also,we can examine the history ofthe
IV itself to see how its current value differs from its values in the past.
These comparisons will suggest if the option is currently overpriced or
underpriced.
As a trading tool, IV proves particularly useful in selecting calendar
spreads.To evaluate a possible calendar spread trade,compare the IV of
two call (or put) options that have the same strike price but different
expiration months.If the front-month option has a higher IV than the
distant month,this is calleda volatility skew.Such skews are important in
initiating a calendar spread by buying the relatively cheap distant month
option and selling the relatively expensive front-month option.This con-
cept is discussed more fully in Chapter 13,“Advanced Calendar Spreads.”
Checking the IV of an option is also a good way to avoid a trap,which
is known in options trading as the volatility crush. Buying an option
with an extremely high IV can be a costly mistake. High IV is often
associated with some intense excitement about the underlying stock,
219
Chapter 29 Implied Volatility and the Black-Scholes Formula

such as the rumor of a buyout, FDA drug approval, settlement of a
court case,and so on.As soon as the excitement is over,the IV falls back
to some more normal level,and the value ofthe option is “crushed.”An
option purchased when its IV is high will be reduced to a fraction ofits
purchaseprice when the IV suddenly reverts to its mean value.
Comments
The Black-Scholes formula, and some modern variations of the
formula,continue to play an important role in guiding options traders.
It may seem backward to use the Black-Scholes formula to determine
the IV ofan option rather than to determine the theoretical price ofan
option.But,experience has shown that the IV of an option is a useful
concept, because the prices in the marketplace are providing the true
value of the volatility parameter for each individual option.
Comparison of the current IV against historical norms leads to a more
reliable estimation of whether an option is currently overpriced or
underpriced.
The brokerage firms that are options friendly will provide IV values in
their data feed.Also, the CBOE Web site offers a service that provides
volatility data.
220
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND