30*
THE PUT-CALL PARITY
RELATIONSHIP
Calls Cost More Than Puts
It is easy to verify that calls are actually more expensive than puts by
making the following observation: Find a stock whose price coincides
with a strike price. Then check the prices of the call and put options
associated with that same strike price and which have the same expira-
tion month.You might guess that these options would have the same
price, but instead you would find that the price of the call is always
greater than that ofthe put.The difference would be small in the front-
month options,but becomes significantly larger as you go out to more
distant expiration dates. The most pronounced difference in price is
seen in the LEAPS options.
This price difference between puts and calls is known in option pric-
ingtheory as put-call parity,even though it might seem more appropri-
ately titled as put-call disparity. What is the reason for this price
difference and why is it important in options trading? This chapter dis-
cusses the answers to these questions.
To understand why calls are more expensive than puts,we need to delve
just a bit into the theory of options pricing. A method frequently
employed in the theoretical investigations ofoptions is the use ofhypo-
thetical portfolios. The idea is to formulate an idealized portfolio,
which can be compared against a more realistic portfolio in order to
reveal some fundamental truth.
Let’s consider a hypothetical portfolio that is long 100 shares of stock
with a price per share denoted by S(t).This portfolio will also include
221

one long put contract with a price per share denoted by P(t).The final
component of this portfolio will be one short call contract with a price
per share denoted by C(t).
Both options have the same strike price, K, and the same expiration
date.The per-share value ofthe total portfolio is denoted by V(t).It can
be expressed as follows:
V(t) = S(t) + P(t) – C(t). [1]
Note that the letters used to designate various prices have been aug-
mented with a (t) notation. This notation is used in mathematics to
remind us that the value of each price can change as time progresses.
The strike price K does not carry this notation because its value does
not change with time.
In this idealized portfolio,we want to rule out the possibility that either
of the options is exercised. So, we assume that both options retain
enough time value to avoid any assignment before the expiration date.
To gain some insight into the nature of the idealized portfolio of [1],
let’s see what its value will be when the expiration date ofthe options is
reached. We signify that the expiration time has arrived by denoting
t =T. At expiration, the stock price S(T) could be either higher or
lower than the strike price K of the options.We need to examine both
possibilities.
If the stock price at expiration S(T) exceeds the strike price K,the call
option will have a value of C(T) = S(T) – K,while the put option will
be worthless, implying that P(T) = 0. In this case, it follows from [1]
that V(T) = K.This says that the value ofthe idealized portfolio at expi-
ration will be equal to the dollar value of the option strike price K.
If the stock price at expiration S(T) is less than the strike price K, the
put option will have a value of P(T) = K – S(T),while the call option
will be worthless,implying that C(T) = 0.In this case,it follows from
[1] that V(T) = K.Again,we find that the value ofthe idealized portfo-
lio at expiration is equal to the dollar value ofthe option strike price K.
After having examined both possible outcomes, we conclude that
regardless of the price of the stock at the expiration date,this idealized
222
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

portfolio described by [1] will always have the same value,namely the
following:
V(T) = K. [2]
We can now develop a logical argument as to what the value ofthe ide-
alized portfolio should be at any time before expiration when t < T.The
logic of the argument goes like this.
If you were to buy the portfolio described by [1] at any time before
expiration,what would be a fair price for it? We see from [2] that it is
guaranteed to be worth K dollars at expiration.Should we be willing to
buy it for K dollars? Certainly not.We would be foolish to pay someone
K dollars to own a portfolio that will be worth only K dollars several
months later.That person would happily take our money and invest it
in a riskless,interest-bearing product such as a U.S.treasury bill.At the
option’s expiration date,they would cash out the treasury bill and use
K dollars to buy back the portfolio,while pocketing the interest earned.
Thus,we conclude that the true value ofthe portfolio [1] prior to expi-
ration should be K dollars discounted so as to compensate for the inter-
est it could earn until the options expire.We can express this value of
the portfolio as follows:
V(t) = K exp{- r (T – t)}, t < T. [3]
In [3],r stands for the interest rate associated with the treasury bill,and
T – t denotes the amount of time remaining until the options expire.
The exp{ } notation denotes the exponential function,which is used to
describe the continuous compounding of interest.
We combine [1] and [3] to obtain the put-call parity relationship:
C(t) – P(t) = S(t) – K exp{-r (T – t)}, t < T. [4]
Now we can apply this put-call parity relationship [4] to demonstrate
that calls are more expensive than puts.To fairly compare the prices of
the call and put, we want the stock price to coincide with the strike
223
Chapter 30 The Put-Call Parity Relationship

price.That is,we want to make the comparison when S(t) = K.In that
special situation,[4] becomes the following:
C(t) – P(t) = K [ 1 – exp{- r (T-t)}] > 0, t < T. [5]
Because the right side of[5] is positive,it follows that C(t) > P(t).That
is,the price of the call is always greater than the price of the put.
Applications of Put-Call Parity
1. Animportantapplicationof[4]isthenotionof“synthetic
stock.”Asanalternativetobuying100sharesofstockatthe
strikepriceK,itispossibletocreateasyntheticreplicaofthe
stockbybuyingonecallcontractandsellingoneputcontract
withthesamestrikepriceKandthesameexpirationmonth.
Howwelldoesthissyntheticstocktracktherealthing?At
expiration,whent=T,[4]impliesthefollowing:
C(T) – P(T) = S(T) – K. [6]
That is,the synthetic stock,which has a value of C(T) – P(T)
is exactly equal to the profit or loss that results from buying
the stock at the strike price K.
This notion of synthetic stock was presented in Chapter 21,
“Stock Substitutes.”It is particularly appealing because the
cost of C(t) – P(t) is relatively small compared to the cost of
buying the stock.This means that it is possible to mimic
stock performance for a small fraction of the price of real
stock.Of course,you must keep in mind that the short put
will be viewed as “naked”by your broker,who will require
some margin to hold this position.
2. A useful options trade for long-term,buy-and-hold stocks is
the “collar trade”using LEAPS.Collar trades are discussedin
Chapters 18,“Collars,”and 19,“Advanced Collars.”In this
trade,a stock is purchased for the long term,while an at-the-
money LEAPS put is bought to protect the purchase price of
the stock and an out-of-the money LEAPS call is sold to
224
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

finance the cost of the put.Under the right circumstances,
this collar trade can be set up so that there is essentially no
risk to your investment,while still allowing for a possible
upside profit of 15 percent to 20 percent on an annualized
basis.
The riskless aspect of the collar trade is possible because LEAPS calls
carry much more time value than LEAPS puts,as implied by [4].The
cash received from selling the more-expensive LEAPS call is used in
paying for the relatively inexpensive LEAPS put. It is this disparity in
price that allows for a good collartrade.
225
Chapter 30 The Put-Call Parity Relationship

This page intentionally left blank