9
MISCELLANEOUS TIPS
H ere are some miscellaneous tips to help you become more
successful in trading options.Some of these have already been
suggested in earlier chapters, but are worthy of repeating here
for emphasis.
Time Is Money
The expression“time is money”is one of the most important concepts
in options trading. It is most relevant to those who either own an
option or are planning to buy an option.
If you own an option,time is your enemy.You must keep in mind that
the time value ofyour option will diminish,particularly during the last
two to three weeks before expiration. If your option is out-of-the-
money,you are especially vulnerable to a total loss ofinvestment in the
trade.Never hold an out-of-the-money option until the very end with
only the faint hope that unforeseen circumstances will cause the stock
to move favorably for you. An early exit from a few of these hopeless
trades can salvage enough capital to fully finance a new trade. Forget
about those rare instances in which the stock did finally move favorably
during expiration week, because those highly infrequent payoffs will
not offset several trades with a 100 percent loss.
When you are considering an option to buy,make sure that you allow
enough time to be proven right in your judgment about the stock.
Itmay be tempting to select that cheap front-month option on a stock
that you expect to soon move up,but three to four weeks can pass very
quickly.The option with the same strike price that expires two to three
months later may seem expensive,but it is usually worth paying more
to get the extra time to participate in the expected stock movement.
63

Trading with the Trend
Before initiating an option trade,check thecurrent trend of your stock
as well as the overall trend in the market. Because option trades are
time limited,make sure that the trend is working with you.
It is usually not wise to take an option position that attempts to capture
a bottom or a top in the stock price.Wait for some confirmation of the
move you want to capture.You can afford to be patient about entering
a trade,because,with the leverage of options,you do not need to catch
much of a move in the stock to make a nice profit.
If the stock you like has pulled back,look for a clear indication that it
has resumed its uptrend before buying a call.If the overall market has
been in a bearish mode, be careful about initiating a bullish option
trade until a reversal seemsevident.
Risk Capital for Options Trading
Beginning options traders often ask,“How much of my total trading
capital should I devote to options trading?” To answer this question,
you must decide how much of your total investment capital you are
willing to use for high-risk trading. This individual decision depends
on many factors,not the least ofwhich is your tolerance for risk.Ifyou
are conservative,allot no more than 10 percent ofyour total investment
capital for trading options.
After you have decided on an amount that you feel comfortable using
for high-risk trading,commit only about 15 percent of that amount to
any single options trade. For example, if you initially decide that of
your $50,000 trading capital, you can devote $5,000 toward trading
options,risk no more than about $750 in any individual trade.
In the very beginning,limit yourselfto only two to three trades that are
open at the same time.As you gain confidence,you can increase that up
to five to six trades,which at 15 percent per trade would involve essen-
tially all ofyour allowed high-risk capital.It is wise to always keep a lit-
tle cash in reserve for special purposes.
As you become more knowledgeable about options, you can devote a
larger portion of your total trading capital toward trades that use
64
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

options.For example,you can begin to use long-term options (LEAPS
if available) as a substitute for stock,even in some of the more conser-
vative portions ofyour portfolio.Also you may want to use put options
as a low-cost insurance for your total portfolio.
Tracking Trades
It is important for you to acquire an appreciation for the progress of
your trades over time.You need to develop a feel for the change in the
price of an option as the underlying stock price changes and as time
passes. The best way to achieve this is to systematically track your
trades.
After you have initiated a trade, begin a tracking process.You can do
this either in a spreadsheet or simply by hand with a sheet of paper.
Enter the symbol for the underlying stock at the left end ofthe first row
and immediately to the right indicate the price of the stock when the
trade was entered.On the row below,just under the stock symbol,enter
the option that you have purchased along with the number ofcontracts
(for example,5 Nov 20 calls).Immediately to the right,enter the price
per share paid for the option,which should line up just under the stock
price at the time of purchase.
Then, on a regular schedule, record the prices of the stock and the
option in horizontal rows while moving from left to right across the
page.Each new entry will show the current price ofthe stock in the first
row and the corresponding price of the option in the row just below it.
These log entries can be done as frequently as day by day or as infre-
quently as once a week,depending on how closely the trade needs mon-
itoring.To keep track ofthe passage oftime,you can occasionally enter
a date next to the stock and option prices recorded on that day.
This tracking process will provide you with a record of how your trade
is progressing over time.By following this record,you will soon devel-
op a good sense of two basic option properties:(1) the response of the
option price to a change in the stock price, and (2) the decay in the
value of the option as the expiration date is neared.
After you have some experience with this record-keeping process, you
will be able to make a very good guess ofthe option price as soon as you
65
Chapter 9 Miscellaneous Tips

have seen the stock price.This tracking process will help you to devel-
op a keen sense of when to exit a trade.
Anticipating Events
It is important tokeep abreast ofany upcoming events that concern the
stock associated with your option trade. Any event that might have a
significant influence on the stock price has the potential to produce a
huge change in the price of a related option.
Of course,some events cannot be anticipated,but there are many that
can be.Perhaps the most important event for any stock is the quarterly
earnings report. Also, dates for stock splits and dividends are impor-
tant.These dates are known well in advance and can be easily found on
free Web sites (for example, Yahoo! Financial). Less-common events
such as a drug approval or a court decision may not have a specifically
announced date, but the likely time may be known within a couple
of weeks.
If you are tracking your trades as suggested,you can enter the impor-
tant dates as part of the log process.
Real-Time Quotes
Nowadays,it is fairly easy to obtain cheap,if not free,streaming quotes
of stock and options prices in real time.Many of the major brokerage
firms offer this data free to customers who are even mildly active
traders. Access to real-time price data is very important for entering
and exiting option trades. By watching option prices in real time, you
can make a more intelligent decision about executing a trade at the best
price available.
Market Orders with Options
Don’t usethem except in extreme circumstances.If you enter a market
order to buy or sell an option,you will very frequently be disappointed
with the fill.It is usually worth the extra trouble to enter a limit order,
monitor the price movement of the option, and then adjust the limit
price if necessary to get filled at a fair price.
66
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Options Calculator
This is something you should consider as soon as you have developed
some preliminary experience with options trades. Many traders now
rely on an options calculator to evaluate a potential trade before they
initiate it.These calculators can do a variety ofthings to help you make
an informed decision about a trade.They can estimate the profit or loss
in an option trade that would exist for any price ofthe underlying stock
at any time before the expiration date of an option.They can compute
the probability of your trade being profitable based on the volatility of
the underlying stock.
The most useful options calculators generate a visual image in the form
of a risk graph,as seen in Chapter 5,“Risk Graphs”.These risk graphs
are particularly useful when evaluating a trade that involves multiple
options and more than one expiration month.
Unfortunately,many of the best options calculators come with a hefty
price tag. Some of the options friendly brokers provide a free options
calculator as part of their data feed service.
If nothing else,these options calculators can save you from initiating a
trade that has little chance for success.Avoid a few hopeless tradesand
you have justified paying for a calculator.
67
Chapter 9 Miscellaneous Tips

This page intentionally left blank