Reflexivity in
the Stock Market
n trying to develop a theory of reflexivity, I shall start with the stock
i
market. For one thing, it is the market I am most familiar with: I have
been a professional investor for more than twenty-five years. For an­
other, the stock market provides an excellent laboratory for testing the­
ories: changes are expressed in quantitative terms and the data are easily
accessible. Even the participants, views are usually available in the form
of brokers* reports. Most important, I have actually tested my theory in
the stock market and I have some interesting case studies to present.
As I mentioned in the Introduction, I did not develop my ideas
on reflexivity in connection with my activities in the stock market.
The theory of reflexivity started out as abstract philosophical specu­
lation and only gradually did I discover its relevance to the behavior
of stock prices. I was singularly unsuccessful in formulating my the­
ory at the level of abstraction at which I conceived it: my failure as a
philosopher stands in stark contrast with my career as an investment
professional. I hope that by presenting my ideas in the reverse order
from the one in which I arrived at them I may be able to avoid get­
ting lost in arcane abstractions.
There is yet another reason why the stock market may provide the
best entry point for the study of reflexive phenomena. The stock mar­
ket comes as close to meeting the criteria of perfect competition as any
market: a central marketplace, homogeneous products, low transaction
49
--- Page 73 ---
50 THEORY
and transportation costs, instant communications, a large enough crowd
of participants to ensure that no individual can influence market prices
in the ordinary course of events, and special rules for insider transac­
tions as well as special safeguards to provide all participants with access
to relevant information. What more can one ask for? If there is any
place where the theory of perfect competition ought to be translated
into practice, it is in the stock market.
Vet there is little empirical evidence of an equilibrium or even a
tendency for prices to move toward an equilibrium. The concept of an
equilibrium seems irrelevant at best and misleading at worst. The evi­
dence shows persistent fluctuations, whatever length of time is chosen
as the period of observation. Admittedly, the underlying conditions that
are supposed to be reflected in stock prices are also constantly chang­
ing, but it is difficult to establish any firm relationship between changes
in stock prices and changes in underlying conditions. Whatever rela­
tionship can be established has to be imputed rather than observed. I
intend to use the theory of reflexivity to criticize the preoccupation of
economic theory with the equilibrium position. What better example
could I find than the stock market?
Existing theories about the behavior of stock prices are remarkably
inadequate. They are of so little value to the practitioner that I am not
even fully familiar with them. The fact that I could get by without
them speaks for itself.
Generally theories fall into two categories: fundamentalist and
technical. More recently, the random walk theory has come into vogue;
this theory holds that the market fully discounts all future develop­
ments so that the individual participants chances of over- or underper­
forming the market as a whole are even. This line of argument has
served as theoretical justification for the increasing number of institu­
tions that invest their money in index funds. The theory is manifestly
false—I have disproved it by consistently outperforming the averages
over a period of twelve years. Institutions may be well advised to invest
in index funds rather than making specific investment decisions, but the
reason is to be found in their substandard performance, not in the im­
possibility of outperforming the averages.
Technical analysis studies market patterns and the demand and sup­
ply of stocks. It has undoubted merit in predicting probabilities but not
the actual course of events. For the purposes of this discussion it is of
no particular interest, because it has little theoretical foundation other
--- Page 74 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 5 1
than the assertions that stock prices are determined by their supply and
demand and that past experience is relevant in predicting the future.
Fundamental analysis is more interesting because it is an out­
growth of equilibrium theory. Stocks are supposed to have a true or
fundamental value as distinct from their current market price. The fun­
damental value of a stock may be defined either in relation to the earn­
ing power of the underlying assets or in relation to the fundamental
value of other stocks. In either case, the market price of a stock is sup­
posed to tend toward its fundamental value over a period of time so
that the analysis of fundamental values provides a useful guide to invest­
ment decisions.
The important point about this approach is that the connection be­
tween stock prices and the companies whose stocks are traded is as­
sumed to be in one direction. The fortunes of the companies
determine—however belatedly一the relative values of the various
stocks traded in the stock market. The possibility that stock market de­
velopments may affect the fortunes of the companies is left out of ac­
count. There is a clear parallel with the theory of price where the
indifference curve determines the relative amounts consumed, and the
possibility that the market may influence the indifference curve is dis­
regarded. The parallel is not accidental: the fundamentalist approach is
based on the theory of price. But the omission is more glaring in the
stock market than in other markets. Stock market valuations have a di­
rect way of influencing underlying values: through the issue and repur­
chase of shares and options and through corporate transactions of all
kinds—mergers, acquisitions, going public, going private, and so on.
There are also more subtle ways in which stock prices may influence
the standing of a company: credit rating, consumer acceptance, man­
agement credibility, etc. The influence of these factors on stock prices
is, of course, fully recognized; it is the influence of stock prices on these
factors that is so strangely ignored by the fundamentalist approach.
If there are any glaring discrepancies between prevailing stock
prices and fundamental values, they are attributed to future develop­
ments in the companies concerned that are not yet known but are cor­
rectly anticipated by the stock market. Movements in stock prices are
believed to precede the developments that subsequently justify them.
How future developments ought to be discounted is the subject of an
ongoing debate, but it is presumed that the market is doing the job cor­
rectly even if the correct method cannot be theoretically established.
--- Page 75 ---
52 THEORY
This point of view follows naturally from the theory of perfect compe­
tition. It is summed up in the assertion that44the market is always right."
The assertion is generally accepted, even by people who do not put
much faith in fundamental analysis.
I take a totally opposite point of view: I do not accept the proposi­
tion that stock prices are a passive reflection of underlying values, nor
do I accept the proposition that the reflection tends to correspond to
the underlying value. I contend that market valuations are always dis­
torted; moreover—and this is the crucial departure from equilibrium
theory—the distortions can afiect the underlying values. Stock prices
are not merely passive reflections; they are active ingredients in a
process in which both stock prices and the fortunes of the companies
whose stocks are traded are determined. In other words, I regard
changes in stock prices as part of a historical process and I focus on the
discrepancy between the participants' expectations and the actual
course of events as a causal factor in that process.
To explain the process, I take the discrepancy as my starting point. I
do not rule out the possibility that events may actually correspond to
peoples expectations, but I treat it as a limiting case.Translating this as­
sertion into market terms, I claim that market participants are always
biased in one way or another. I do not deny that markets have a predic­
tive or anticipating power that seems uncanny at times, but I argue that
it can be explained by the influence that the participants' bias has on
the course of events. For instance, the stock market is generally believed
to anticipate recessions; it would be more correct to say that it can help
to precipitate them. Thus I replace the assertion that markets are always
right with two others:
1. Markets are always biased in one direction or another.
2. Markets can influence the events that they anticipate.
The combination of these two assertions explains why markets may so
often appear to anticipate events correctly
Using the participants' bias as our starting point, we can try to build
a model of the interaction between the participants' views and the situ­
ation in which they participate. What makes the analysis so difficult is
that the participants' views are part of the situation to which they re­
late. To make any sense of such a complex situation, we need to simpEfy
it. I introduced a simplifying concept when I spoke of the participants'
--- Page 76 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 5 3
bias. Now I want to take the argument a step further and introduce the
concept of a prevailing bias.
Markets have many participants, whose views are bound to differ. I
shall assume that many of the individual biases cancel each other out,
leaving what I call the 4"prevailing bias." This assumption is not appro­
priate to all historical processes but it does apply to the stock market
and to other markets as well. What makes the procedure of aggregating
individual perceptions legitimate is that they can be related to a com­
mon denominator, namely, stock prices. In other historical processes,
the participants' views are too diffuse to be aggregated and the concept
of a prevailing bias becomes little more than a metaphor. In these cases
a different model may be needed, but in the stock market the partici-
pants, bias finds expression in purchases and sales. Other things being
equal, a positive bias leads to rising stock prices and a negative one to
falling prices. Thus the prevailing bias is an observable phenomenon.
Other things are, of course, never equal. We need to know a little
more about those "other things^, in order to build our model. At this
point I shall introduce a second simplifying concept. I shall postulate an
"'underlying trend" that influences the movement of stock prices
whether it is recognized by investors or not. The influence on stock
prices will, of course, vary, depending on the market participantsJ views.
The trend in stock prices can then be envisioned as a composite of the
"'underlying trend" and the '"prevailing bias."
How do these two factors interact? It will be recalled that there
are two connections at play: the participating and the cognitive func­
tions. The underlying trend influences the participants' perceptions
through the cognitive function; the resulting change in perceptions
affects the situation through the participating function. In the case of
the stock market, the primary impact is on stock prices. The change
in stock prices may in turn, affect both the participants' bias and the
underlying trend.
We have here a reflexive relationship in which stock prices are de­
termined by two factors—underlying trend and prevailing bias—both
of which are, in turn, influenced by stock prices. The interplay be­
tween stock prices and the other two factors has no constant: what is
supposed to be the independent variable in one function is the depen­
dent variable in the other. Without a constant, there is no tendency to­
ward equilibrium. The sequence of events is best interpreted as a
process of historical change in which none of the variables—stock
--- Page 77 ---
54 THEORY
prices, underlying trend, and prevailing bias—remains as it was before.
In the typical sequence the three variables reinforce each other first in
one direction and then in the other in a pattern that is known, in its
simplest form, as boom and bust.
First, we must start with some definitions. When stock prices rein­
force the underlying trend, we shall call the trend self-reinforcing;
when they work in the opposite direction, self^correcting. The same
terminology holds for the prevailing bias: it can be self-reinforcing or
self^correcting. It is important to realize what these terms mean. When
a trend is reinforced, it accelerates. When the bias is reinforced, the di­
vergence between expectations and the actual course of future stock
prices gets wider and, conversely when it is seltcorrecting, the diver­
gence gets narrower. As far as stock prices are concerned, we shall de­
scribe them simply as rising and failing. When the prevailing bias helps
to raise prices we shall call it positive; when it works in the opposite di­
rection, negative. Thus rising prices are reinforced by a positive bias and
falling prices by a negative one. In a boom/bust sequence we would
expect to find at least one stretch where rising prices are reinforced by
a positive bias and another where falling prices are reinforced by a neg­
ative bias. There must also be a point where the underlying trend and
the prevailing bias combine to reverse the trend in stock prices.
Let us now try to build a rudimentary model of boom and bust. We
start with an underlying trend that is not yet recognized—although a
prevailing bias that is not yet reflected in stock prices is also conceiv­
able. Thus, the prevailing bias is negative to start with. When the market
participants recognize the trend, this change in perceptions will affect
stock prices. The change in stock prices may or may not affect the un­
derlying trend. In the latter case, there is little more to discuss. In the
former case we have the beginning of a self-reinforcing process.
The enhanced trend will affect the prevailing bias in one of two
ways: it will lead to the expectation of further acceleration or to the
expectation of a correction. In the latter case, the underlying trend
may or may not survive the correction in stock prices. In the former
case, a positive bias develops causing a further rise in stock prices and a
further acceleration in the underlying trend. As long as the bias is selE
reinforcing, expectations rise even faster than stock prices. The under­
lying trend becomes increasingly influenced by stock prices and the
rise in stock prices becomes increasingly dependent on the prevailing
bias, so that both the underlying trend and the prevailing bias become
--- Page 78 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 55
increasingly vulnerable. Eventually, the trend in prices cannot sustain
prevailing expectations and a correction sets in. Disappointed expecta­
tions have a negative effect on stock prices, and faltering stock prices
weaken the underlying trend. If the underlying trend has become
overly dependent on stock prices, the correction may turn into a total
reversal. In that case, stock prices fall, the underlying trend is reversed,
and expectations fall even further. In this way a self-reinforcing process
gets started in the opposite direction. Eventually the downturn also
reaches a climax and reverses itself
Typically a self-reinforcing process undergoes orderly corrections
in the early stages, and, if it survives them, the bias tends to be rein­
forced, and is less easily shaken. When the process is advanced, correc­
tions become scarcer and the danger of a climactic reversal greater.
I have sketched out a typical boom/bust sequence. It can be il­
lustrated by two curves that follow more or less the same direction.
One represents stock prices, and the other, earnings per share. It
would be natural to envision the earnings curve as a measure of the
underlying trend, and the divergence between the two curves as an
indication of the underlying bias. The relationship is much more
complex. The earnings curve incorporates not only the underlying
trend but also the influence of stock prices on that trend; the prevail­
ing bias is expressed only partially by the divergence between the
two curves—partially it is already reflected in those curves. Concepts
that are only partially observable are extremely difficult to work
with; that is why we have chosen variables that can be observed and
quantified—although, as we shall see later, the quantification of
earnings per share can be very misleading. For present purposes, we
shall assume that the "fundamentals" in which investors are inter­
ested are properly measured by earnings per share.
A typical path for the two curves may be as follows. (See the figure
on page 56.) At first, recognition of an underlying trend is lagging but
the trend is strong enough to manifest itself in earnings per share (AB).
When the underlying trend is finally recognized, it is reinforced by ris­
ing expectations (BC). Doubts arise, but the trend survives. Alterna­
tively, the trend waivers but reasserts itself. Such testing may be repeated
several times, but here I show it only once (CD). Eventually conviction
develops and it is no longer shaken by a setback in the earning trend
(DE). Expectations become excessive, and fail to be sustained by reality
(EF).The bias is recognized as such and expectations are lowered (FG).
--- Page 79 ---
56 THEORY
Stock prices lose their last prop and plunge (G).The underlying trend is
reversed, reinforcing the decline (GH). Eventually, the pessimism be­
comes overdone and the market stabilizes (HI).
It should be emphasized that this is only one possible path that re­
sults from the interplay of a single underlying trend and a prevailing
bias. There could be more than one trend at work and the prevailing
bias could have many nuances, so that the sequence of events might re­
quire a totally difierent representation.
A few words about the theoretical construction of the model may
be in order. We are interested in the interplay between the participants'
bias and the actual course of events. Yet the participants, bias is not di­
rectly represented in our model; both curves denote the actual course
of events. The prevailing bias is partially incorporated in the two curves
and partially denoted by the divergence between them.
The great merit of this construction is that it uses variables that
can be quantified. Stock prices serve as a convenient proxy for the sit­
uation to which the participants' bias relates. In other historical
processes the situation that is interconnected with the participants5
perception by the cognitive and participating functions is more diffi­
cult to identify and impossible to quantify. It is the availability of a
--- Page 80 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 5 7
convenient proxy that renders the stock market such a useful labora­
tory for studying reflexivity.
Unfortunately, the model offers only a partial explanation of how
stock prices are determined. The concept of an underlying trend has
been introduced as a placeholder term, to denote changes in the 4"fun­
damentals ?J What the fundamentals are has not been defined. Even the
question of how the fundamentals are to be measured has not been an­
swered. Earnings, dividends, asset value, free cash flow: all these yard­
sticks are relevant, as well as many others, but the relative weight given
to each depends on the investorsJ judgments and is therefore subject to
their bias. We may use earnings per share for purposes of illustration,
but that merely begs the question. It is a question security analysts have
been struggling with for a long time. We do not need to answer it here
in order to develop a theory of reflexivity
Without knowing anything about the fundamentals we can make
some worthwhile generalizations. The first generalization is that stock
prices must have some effect on the fundamentals (whatever they
are), in order to create a boom/bust pattern. Sometimes the connec­
tion is direct, as in the examples I shall use in this chapter, but gener­
ally it is indirect. Often it makes its effect felt through a political
process, such as changes in taxation, or regulation, or attitudes toward
saving and investment.
It is possible to have a reflexive connection between stock prices and
the prevailing bias even if the fundamentals remain unaffected, but the
connection becomes interesting only if the fundamentals are also in­
volved. Without a change in fondamentals, the prevailing bias is likely to
be corrected in short order, as we can observe in the daily fluctuations of
stock prices. It would be quite in order to ignore the bias as mere noise.
That is what the theory of perfect competition and the fundamentalist ap­
proach to security analysis have done. By contrast, when the fundamentals
are affected, the bias cannot be left out of account without serious distor­
tion, because the bias gives rise to a seltreinfbrcing/self-defeating process
that leaves neither stock prices, nor the fundamentals, nor the participants'
views the same as they were before.
The second generalization is that there is bound to be a flaw in the
participants5 perception of the fundamentals. The flaw may not be ap­
parent in the early stages but it is likely to manifest itself later on.
When it does, it sets the stage fbr a reversal in the prevailing bias. If the
--- Page 81 ---
58 THEORY
change in bias reverses the underlying trend a seltreinforcing process
is set in motion in the opposite direction. What the flaw is and how
and when it is likely to manifest itself are the keys to understanding
boom/bust sequences.
The model I presented above is built on these two generalizations.
It hardly needs emphasizing how crude the model is. Nevertheless, it is
valuable in identifying the crucial features of a typical boom/bust se­
quence. These are the unrecognized trend; the beginning of a self^rein-
fbrcing process; the successful test; the growing conviction, resulting in
a widening divergence between reality and expectations; the flaw in
perceptions; the climax; a self^reinfbrcing process in the opposite direc­
tion. Just by identifying these features we can gain some insight into the
behavior of stock prices. We cannot expect much more from our rudi­
mentary model.
In any case, a reflexive model cannot take the place of fundamental
analysis: all it can do is to provide an ingredient that is missing from it.
In principle, the two approaches could be reconciled. Fundamental
analysis seeks to establish how underlying values are reflected in stock
prices, whereas the theory of reflexivity shows how stock prices can
influence underlying values. One provides a static picture, the other a
dynamic one.
A theory that offers a partial explanation of stock price movements
can be very useful to the investor especially if it illuminates a relation­
ship that other investors fail to grasp. Investors operate with limited
funds and limited intelligence: they do not need to know everything.
As long as they understand something better than others, they have an
edge. The trouble with any kind of specialized knowledge is that ones
area of expertise may not be especially interesting, but the theory of re­
flexivity serves to identify historically significant price movements, so it
goes right to the heart of the matter.
The rudimentary model I have outlined above has proved ex­
tremely rewarding in my career as an investor. That may seem surpris­
ing because the model is so simple and it fits a well-trodden stock
market pattern so well that one would expect every investor to be fa­
miliar with it.Yet, that is not the case. Why? Part of the answer must be
that market participants have been misguided by a different theoretical
construction, one derived from classical economics and, even more
important, from the natural sciences. The ingrained attitude is that
stock prices are the passive reflection of some underlying reality and
--- Page 82 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 59
not an active ingredient in the historical process. This view is simply
false. It is remarkable that the error has still not been fully recognized.
Nevertheless, investors do recognize the sequence I have described
and do respond to it, only they respond later than someone who is
working with the appropriate model and is on the lookout for the
crucial features that define the shape of the price curve. That is what
has given me my edge.
The first time I used the model systematically was in the conglom­
erate boom of the late 1960s. It enabled me to make money both on
the way up and on the way down.
The key to the conglomerate boom was a prevailing misconcep­
tion among investors. Investors had come to value growth in per-share
earnings and failed to discriminate about the way the earnings growth
was accomplished. A few companies learned to produce earnings
growth through acquisitions. Once the market started to reward them
for their performance, their task became easier because they could offer
their own highly priced stock in acquiring other companies.
In theory, the process works as follows. Let us assume that all of
the companies involved have the same intrinsic growth in earnings
but the stock of the acquiring company sells at twice the earnings
multiple of the acquired ones; if the acquiring company manages to
double its size, its earnings per share jump by 50%, and its growth
rate increases accordingly.
In practice, the early conglomerates started out with high intrinsic
growth rates that were rewarded by high multiples. Several of the path­
breakers were high-technology companies with a strong defense com­
ponent whose managements recognized that their historic growth rate
could not be sustained indefinitely: Textron, Teledyne, Ling-Temco-
Vought (later LTV), to mention a few. They started to acquire more
mundane companies, but, as their per-share earnings growth acceler­
ated, the multiples expanded instead of contracting. Their success at­
tracted imitators and later on even the most humdrum companies
could attain a high multiple by going on an acquisition spree. For in­
stance, the bulk of Ogdens earnings was derived from trading scrap
metal; nevertheless, the stock sold at more than twenty times earnings
at its peak. Eventually a company could achieve a high multiple just by
promising to put it to good use by making acquisitions.
Managements developed special accounting techniques that en­
hanced the impact of acquisitions. They also introduced changes in
--- Page 83 ---
60 THEORY
the acquired companies, streamlining operations, disposing of assets,
and generally focusing on the bottom line, but these changes were
less significant than the impact on per-share earnings of the acquisi­
tions themselves.
Investors responded like Indians to firewater. At first, the record of
each company was judged on its own merit, but gradually conglomer­
ates became recognized as a group. A new breed of investors emerged,
the so-called go-go fund managers, or gunslingers, who developed a
special affinity with the managements of conglomerates. Direct lines of
communication were opened between them and conglomerates would
place so-called Tetter stock" directly with investors. Eventually, con­
glomerates learned to manage their stock prices as well as their earnings.
Events followed the sequence described in my model. Multiples
expanded and eventually reality could not sustain expectations. More
and more people realized the misconception on which the boom
rested even as they continued to play the game. Acquisitions had to get
larger and larger in order to maintain the momentum, and in the end
they ran into the limits of size. The climactic event was the attempt by
Saul Steinberg to acquire Chemical Bank: it was fought and defeated
by the establishment.
When stock prices started to fall, the decline fed on itself. The fa­
vorable impact of acquisitions on per-share earnings diminished and
eventually it became impractical to make new acquisitions.The internal
problems that had been swept under the carpet during the period of
rapid external growth began to surface. Earnings reports revealed un­
pleasant surprises. Investors became disillusioned and managements
went through their own crises: after the heady days of success, few were
willing to buckle down to the burdens of day-to-day management. The
situation was aggravated by recession, and many of the high-flying con­
glomerates literally disintegrated. Investors were prepared to believe the
worst and in some cases the worst actually occurred. In others, reality
turned out to be better than expectations and eventually the situation
stabilized with the surviving companies, often under new management,
slowly working themselves out from under the debris.
The conglomerate boom is particularly well suited to serve as an il­
lustration of my rudimentary model because the "fiindamentals" are
readily quantified. Investors based their valuations on reported per-
share earnings. However meaningless the figures, they provide charts
that closely conform to my theoretical prototype. Here they are:
--- Page 84 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 61
$ LTV CORP [LTV]
7 CAPITALIZATION 160
B PR O E N F D E S R RED . . ・ . . S1 $ J 2 0 1 4 5 . . 3 7 150
COM.SHRS.. . 6,520.0 140
一 1一953 LOW 130
， Formerly 120(cid:0)
7 Ling lemco-Vought d10(cid:0)
6
.O5
.100
6
.O 90
Earns, from(cid:0)
12/66 include .(cid:0)
Wilson & Co..(cid:0)
merged 6/19/67(cid:0)
and are based(cid:0)
on average shsJ
Pd.23/100th£
Saturn Ind/
Adj. for(cid:0)
3 for 3(cid:0)
8/1/67
E 3 a / r 3 n 1 s / 71 D 12 1 m 0 o .7 s. 0 [ _ \ X(cid:0) 41/2
Earns 12 mos.(cid:0) -6/30/71 D 7.42____ ,4
25 1 3 2 / / 3 3 1 1 / / 7 6 0 9 D D 2 . 3 0 5 5 1 9 2 / / 3 3 0 1 / / 7 7 1 1 D D 7 3 . , 8 3 2 0 _(cid:0) I*(cid:0) 3也
■ — Earns. 12 mo$・ *(cid:0) 6/30/70 D 5.44(cid:0)*^T*|Earns 12 mos(cid:0) ■3V2
o--12/31/61 DS3.14 9/30/70 D 7.20 3/31/72 D 3.35 31/4
50 o —6/30/62 D 2.28 12/31/70 D12J3 1500
20 o 1200
90 o o 9 5 0 0 0 0
60 o 300
30 0
(Courtesy of Securities Research Company, a Division of
Babson-United Investment Advisors, Inc., 208 Newbury St., Boston, MA 02116.)
--- Page 85 ---
62 THEORY
$
70
60
50
46
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
(Courtesy of Securities Research Company, a Division of
Babson-United Investment Advisors, Inc., 208 Newbury St., Boston, MA 02116.)
--- Page 86 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 63
(Courtesy of Securities Research Company, a Division of
Babson-United Investment Advisors, Inc., 208 Newbury St., Boston, MA 02116.)
My best documented encounter with a boom/bust sequence is that
of Real Estate Investment Trusts. REITs, as they are called, are a special
corporate form brought into existence by legislation. Their key feature is
that they can distribute their income free of corporate taxation, provided
they distribute all the income they receive. The opportunity created by
this legislation remained largely unexploited until 1969 when a large
number of REITs were founded. I was present at the creation and, fresh
from my experience with conglomerates, recognized their boom/bust
potential. I published a research report whose key part reads as follows:
--- Page 87 ---
64 THEORY
THE CASE FOR MORTGAGE TRUSTS
(February 1970)
THE CONCEPT
Superficially, mortgage trusts seem to resemble mutual funds de­
signed to provide high current yields. But the analogy is mislead­
ing. The true attraction of mortgage trusts lies in their ability to
generate capital gains for their shareholders by selling additional
shares at a premium over book value. If a trust with a book value
of $10 and a 12% return on equity doubles its equity by selling
additional shares at $20, the book value jumps to $13.33 and per-
share earnings go from $1.20 to $1.60.
Investors are willing to pay a premium because of the high
yield and the expectation of per-share earnings growth. The
higher the premium, the easier it is for the trust to fulfill this ex­
pectation. The process is a self^reinforcing one. Once it gets under
way, the trust can show a steady growth in per-share earnings de­
spite the fact that it distributes practically all its earnings as divi­
dends. Investors who participate in the process early enough can
enjoy the compound benefits of a high return on equity a rising
book value, and a rising premium over book value.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH
The conventional method of security analysis is to try and predict
the future course of earnings and then to estimate the price that
investors may be willing to pay for those earnings. This method is
inappropriate to the analysis of mortgage trusts because the price
that investors are willing to pay for the shares is an important fac­
tor in determining the future course of earnings.
Instead of predicting future earnings and valuations sepa­
rately, we shall try to predict the future course of the entire self­
reinforcing process. We shall identify three major factors which
reinforce each other and we shall sketch out a scenario of the
probable course of development. The three factors are:
1. The effective rate of return on the mortgage trusts capital
2. The rate of growth of the mortgage trusts size
--- Page 88 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 65
3. Investor recognition, i.e., the multiple investors are willing to
pay for a given rate of growth in per-share earnings
THE SCENARIO
Act One: At present, the effective yield on construction loans is at
an optimum. Not only are interest rates high but losses are at a
relatively low level. There is a pent-up demand for housing and
new houses readily find buyers. There is a shortage of funds so that
the projects which do get oflF the ground are economically well
justified. Builders who are still in business are more substantial and
more reliable than at the tail end of a boom. Moreover, they do
their utmost to complete the construction phase as fast as possible
because money is so expensive. Shortages of labor and material do
cause defaults and delays but rising costs permit mortgage trusts to
liquidate their commitments without loss.
Money is tight and alternative sources of interim financing are
in short supply. Investor recognition of the mortgage trust concept
has progressed far enough to permit the formation of new trusts
and the rapid expansion of existing ones. The self-reinforcing
process gets under way
Act Two: If and when inflation abates, the effective yield on con­
struction loans will decline. On the other hand, there will be a
housing boom and bank credit will be available at advantageous
rates. With higher leverage, the rate of return on equity can be
maintained despite a lower effective yield. With a growing market
and growing investor recognition, the premium over book value
may continue to increase. Mortgage trusts are likely to take full
advantage of the premium and show a rapid rise in both size and
per-share earnings. Since entry into the field is unrestricted, the
number of mortgage trusts will also increase.
Act Three: The self^reinforcing process will continue until mort­
gage trusts have captured a significant part of the construction
loan market. Increasing competition will then force them to take
greater risks. Construction activity itself will have become more
(Continued)
--- Page 89 ---
66 THEORY
speculative and bad loans will increase. Eventually, the housing
boom will slacken off and housing surpluses will appear in various
parts of the country, accompanied by a slack real estate market and
temporary declines in real estate prices. At this point, some of the
mortgage trusts will be bound to have a large number of delin­
quent loans in their portfolios and the banks will panic and de­
mand that their lines of credit be paid off.
Act Four: Investor disappointment will affect the valuation of the
group, and a lower premium coupled with slower growth will in
turn reduce the per-share earnings progression. The multiple will
decline and the group will go through a shakeout period. After
the shakeout, the industry will have attained maturity: there will
be few new entries, regulations may be introduced, and existing
trusts will settle down to a more moderate growth.
EVALUATION
The shakeout is a long time away Before it occurs, mortgage
trusts will have grown manifold in size and mortgage trust shares
will have shown tremendous gains. It is not a danger that should
deter investors at the present time.
The only real danger at present is that the self^reinfbrcing
process may not get under way at all. In a really serious stock mar­
ket decline investors may be unwilling to pay any premium even
for a 12% return on equity. We doubt that such conditions would
arise; we are more inclined to expect an environment in which a
12% return is more exceptional than it has been recently and in
which the self-reinforcing processes of the last few years, notably
conglomerates and computer leasing companies, are going
through their shakeout period. In such an environment there
should be enough money available for a self^reinforcing process
which is just starting, especially if it is the only game in town.
If the process fails to get under way investors would find
downside protection in the book value. The new trusts are coming
to the market at book value plus underwriting commission (usu­
ally 10%). Most recently formed trusts are selling at a premium
which is still modest. It will be recalled that when their assets are
--- Page 90 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 67
fully employed in interim loans, mortgage trusts can earn 11% on
their book without leverage and 12% with a 1:1 leverage. A mod­
est premium over book value would seem justified even in the ab­
sence of growth.
If the self^reinfbrcing process does get under way, shareholders
in well-managed mortgage trusts should enjoy the compound
benefits of a high return on equity a rising book value, and a rising
premium over book value for the next few years. The capital gains
potential is of the same order of magnitude as at the beginning of
other self-reinforcing processes in recent stock market history
My report had an interesting history. It came at a time when go-go
fond managers had suffered severe losses in the collapse of the con­
glomerates. Since they were entitled to share in the profits but did not
have to share in the losses of the funds they managed, they were in­
clined to grasp at anything that held out the prospect of a quick profit.
They instinctively understood how a self^reinforcing process works
since they had just participated in one and they were anxious to play.
The report found a tremendous response whose extent I realized only
when I received a telephone call from a bank in Cleveland asking for a
new copy because theirs had gone through so many Xerox incarnations
that it was no longer legible. There were only a few mortgage trusts in
existence at the time but the shares were so eagerly sought after that
they nearly doubled in price in the space of a month or so. Demand
generated supply and there was a flood of new issues coming to mar­
ket. When it became clear that the stream of new mortgage trusts was
inexhaustible, prices fell almost as rapidly as they had gone up. Obvi­
ously the readers of the report failed to take into account the ease of
entry and their mistake was corrected in short order. Nevertheless their
enthusiastic reception helped to get the self^reinforcing process de­
scribed in the report under way Subsequent events took the course
outlined in the report. Mortgage trust shares enjoyed a boom that was
not as violent as the one that followed the publication of the report but
turned out to be more enduring.
I had invested heavily in mortgage trusts and took some profits
when the reception of my study exceeded my expectations. But I was
--- Page 91 ---
68 THEORY
sufficiently carried away by my own success to be caught in the down­
draft with a significant inventory. I hung on and even increased my po­
sitions. I followed the industry closely fbr a year or so and sold my
holdings with good profits. Then I lost touch with the group until a
few years later when problems began to surface. I was tempted to estab­
lish a short position but was handicapped in that I was no longer famil­
iar with the terrain. Nevertheless, when I reread the report I had
written several years earlier, I was persuaded by my own prediction. I
decided to sell the group short more or less indiscriminately Moreover,
as the shares fell I maintained the same level of exposure by selling ad­
ditional shares short. My original prediction was fulfilled and most REITs
went broke. The result was that I reaped more than 100% profit on my
short positions——a seeming impossibility since the maximum profit on
a short position is 100%. (The explanation is that I kept on selling addi­
tional shares.)
Self^reinforcing/self-defeating cycles like the conglomerate boom
and the REITs do not occur every day. There are long fallow periods
when the specialist in such cycles remains unemployed. He need not
starve, however. The divergence between underlying trends and in­
vestor recognition persists at all times and the astute investor can take
advantage of it. New industries arise, or old ones come back into favor.
Typically, they are inadequately followed at first. For instance, when de­
fense spending started to rise in the early 1970s after a long decline,
there were only two or three analysts left who followed the industry al­
though it still represented a substantial portion of the economy Those
who were left were too demoralized to recognize the beginning of a
major new trend.That was a wonderful time to invest in defense stocks.
There were high-tech defense stocks that had never been visited by an
analyst, like E-Systems, Inc., and well-established companies that had
fallen on evil days trying to diversify out of defense, like Sanders Asso­
ciates, or getting caught up in scandals trying to sell airplanes through
bribery, like Northrop and Lockheed.
In the case of defense stocks, there was no self-reinforcing process
involved but investor recognition certainly helped the price of the
stocks. Actually it is a rare case where the investors' bias leaves the fun­
damentals totally unaffected. Even with defense stocks the prevailing
bias played a role, but it was a negative one. Lockheed had to be bailed
out by the government and companies like Sanders Associates had to
restructure their debt by oflfering convertible bonds at prices that
--- Page 92 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 69
turned out to be very low in retrospect. Only when the negative bias
was corrected was there very little further feedback: companies had lit­
tle need for additional capital, and managements, having been burned
once before, were leery of diversifying out of defense. There were ex­
ceptions, like United Aircraft, but investorsJ bias never turned positive
enough to allow a self-reinforcing process to get under way: many of
United Aircrafts acquisitions were for cash and those that involved
stock did not enhance earnings significantly. The result was a larger, di­
versified company, but no boom and bust in the stock.
Perhaps the most interesting case of negative bias occurred in tech­
nology stocks. After the stock market debacle of 1974, investors were
leery of any company that needed to raise equity capital from outside
sources. Distributed data processing was in the early stages of its devel­
opment. New companies like Datapoint and Four-Phase were in the
vanguard with IBM lagging badly. The market was practically explod­
ing but these little companies were hamstrung by their inability to raise
capital. The stocks were selling at very low multiples of anticipated
earnings and the main argument against them was that they would not
be able to grow fast enough to meet the demand and eventually IBM
would move into the market. The argument turned out to be valid, but
not before these companies became large and prosperous and investors
became eager to throw money at them at high multiples. Those who
had been willing to fight the negative bias were amply rewarded.
As the various niches occupied by these small companies converged
to form a large market, most of them were absorbed by larger compa­
nies and those that stayed independent fell on evil days. Datapoint is cur­
rently looking for a home at a much reduced multiple. Four-Phase was
recently acquired by Motorola, which proceeded to lose its shirt on it. If
the initial market reaction to distributed data-processing companies had
been more positive, it is possible that some of the early starters might
have grown fast enough to survive,just as the earlier wave of microcom­
puter manufacturers did spawn a few enduring companies like Digital
Equipment and Data General.
The negative bias of the 1975-1976 period gave way to the oppo­
site extreme. It found expression in a venture capital boom that culmi­
nated in the second quarter of 1983. The sequence of events is not as
clear cut as in the case of RJEITs, but that is only because high tech­
nology is not as homogeneous an industry The same reflexive interac­
tion between stock prices, prevailing bias, and fundamentals can be
--- Page 93 ---
7 0 THEORY
observed but much more specific knowledge is required to trace the
course of events.
The availability of venture capital on attractive terms led to a pro­
liferation of new ventures. Every new company needed equipment, as
well as inventory so that electronic equipment manufacturers enjoyed a
boom, and so did the manufacturers of products and components. The
electronics industry is a large customer of its own products so that the
boom was self^reinfbrcing. But the proliferation of companies intensi­
fied competition. Industry leaders lost their market position as a new
generation of products was introduced because the individuals who
were responsible for developing them left their companies and set up
new ones. Instead of companies growing in step with their industry, the
industry grew by the multiplication of companies. Investors failed to
recognize this trend; as a result, technology stocks in general and new
issues in particular became substantially overvalued.
The new issue boom culminated in the second quarter of 1983.
When prices started to decline, fewer issues could be sold and eventu­
ally venture capitalists became less venturesome. As fewer companies
were formed and the existing ones depleted their cash, the market for
technology products softened. Competition intensified and profit mar­
gins deteriorated. The process started to feed on itself and the low point
has probably still not been reached.*
The venture capital boom was not the only cause of the subsequent
shakeout一the strong dollar and the rise of Japanese competition were
at least as important—but it is clear that stock prices had an impact on
the "fundamentals'' in both directions.
What distinguishes the conglomerate and REIT sequences from
the venture capital boom is that in the first two cases the underlying
trend itself was based on the exploitation of the investors7 bias while in
the third it was not. In the case of conglomerates the idea was to ac­
quire other companies with inflated paper; in the case of REITs the
idea was equity leveraging. The idea behind the latest generation of
technology products had nothing to do with the stock market.
To understand the ups and downs of technology stocks we must
know something about the underlying trends in technology; in the case
★PS., February 1987: No longer true after the current explosive rally
--- Page 94 ---
Reflexivity in the Stock Market 7 1
of conglomerates and REITs we need to know little else than the the­
ory of reflexivity
It is important to realize, however, that knowing everything
about underlying trends in technology is not sufficient to explain the
ups and downs of technology stocks: the reflexive interaction be­
tween underlying trends, prevailing biases, and stock prices also
needs to be understood. Combining the two kinds of understanding
is extremely difficult. Those who want to be familiar with technol­
ogy must follow the industry closely and continuously; those who
want to exploit the divergence between perception and reality must
move from group to group. Most technology experts are ignorant of
reflexivity and tend to remain fully invested at all times. Their popu­
larity and influence wax and wane in a reflexive fashion. After the re­
cent decline in technology stocks, a new breed of analysts seems to
be emerging who are overly sensitive to the importance of investorsJ
perceptions. After a decent interval it may be once again profitable to
go against the prevailing bias and invest in technology stocks on the
basis of fundamental trends.
I have always had a lot of difficulty investing in technology stocks
because of the specialized knowledge required. Finally, I managed to
gain a good insight into the computer industry during the 1975—1976
period and profited from the prevailing negative bias. I held on to my
positions for a few years but then I sold them and lost my grip on the
industry. In 1981 I made the mistake of not participating in a venture
capital fund operated by one of the most successful venture capitalists
of the period in the belief that the boom could not last long enough to
allow investors to exit in time. In this, I was undoubtedly influenced by
misgivings about the larger picture. In any event, his investors realized a
good profit in 1983. By that time I was totally out of touch with tech­
nology stocks and the boom passed me by.
Even the conglomerate and REIT sequences were not totally
self-contained. Extraneous developments, such as the level of eco­
nomic activity, regulation, or specific events (e.g., the attempted
takeoyer of Chemical Bank), played a crucial role in the conglomer­
ate boom. In less "pure" sequences the importance of outside influ­
ences is even greater.
We are currently in the midst of another self^reinfbrcing/self-
defeating cycle that will go down in history as the mergermania of the
1980s. Instead of inflated paper, it is cash that serves as the currency. The
--- Page 95 ---
72 THEORY
scale of transactions already dwarfs the conglomerate boom. Merger­
mania is but an element in a much larger ongoing historical drama
whose ramifications reach far beyond the stock market and involve pol­
itics, exchange rates, monetary and fiscal policies, quirks of taxation, in­
ternational capital movements, and many other developments.
I shall make an attempt at unraveling the ongoing historical drama,
but that is not as simple as analyzing a more or less self-contained
boom/bust sequence. The larger picture is full of reflexive interactions
as well as nonreflexive fundamental trends. We need a more complex
model that allows for the transition from one boom/bust sequence to
another and for the coexistence of several reflexive processes at the
same time.
Before I embark on such an ambitious project, I want to examine
another market that is characterized by vicious and benign circles: the
currency market.
