Foreword to
the New Edition
ome years ago, students in my seminar on international finance
S
wanted exposure to a "real live" speculator. George Soros kindly
agreed to spend an evening at Princeton, interacting with an en­
larged group, including a number of the economics faculty.
We all got more than we bargained for. George announced at the start
that the concept of equilibrium has no relevance to the way financial mar­
kets operate. Thinking in those terms would be counterproductive in
terms of trading success. Traders make money by following the perceived
trend. Markets react to participants' expectations, and those perceptions
influence prices, tending to validate themselves in a seltreinforcing
process until some unpredictable event jolts expectations.
With the assembled professors listening in intense silence, I
valiantly, but without much conviction, tried my best to state the stan­
dard case for efficient markets and for the "fiindamentals" determining
exchange rates. George didn't give much ground. He had on his side
the empirical fact of wide fluctuations in market rates that are hard to
reconcile with the fundamentals or any understandable concept of effi­
cient markets. In the words of his new Introduction to The Alchemy of
Finance, “the very idea that financial markets tend toward ... equilib­
rium seems to be contradicted by the evidence."
For me, the spirit of that evening was well characterized when one
of the younger professors finally summoned the courage to challenge
xi
--- Page 13 ---
xii FOREWORD TO THE NEW EDITION
our guest. "Mr. Soros," he said, “you underestimate the work of acade­
mic economists in understanding exchange markets. There are interest­
ing and promising developments in chaos theory”
Well, I confess that I am not familiar with chaos theory I also have
difficulty at times in following the subtleties of George Soross mind as
he elaborates his concept of reflexivity But I understand enough to wel­
come his effort to restate (and simplify) his thinking in his continuing
effort to find a new paradigm for market, and indeed human, behavior.
To my mind, he does decisively puncture the standard textbook
model of efl&cient markets and rational expectations, what he labels
“market fimdamentalism" that can only lead to '"false claims and mis­
leading results."
Its not that market participants are irrational or inefficient in the
everyday sense of those words. Nor are expectations unimportant; any­
one familiar with asset markets knows that it is expectations that move
prices. But Soros goes beyond that observation to emphasize that ex­
pectations cannot and will not arrive at a stable equilibrium precisely
because the thinking, and therefore the actions, of market participants
will affect market behavior: the market will in turn influence the "丘in-
damentals" and shape new expectations in a continuing reflexive
process. More broadly as Soros returns to his first love of philosophy, he
sees the reflexive process as an innate part of human existence; '"think-
ing is part of the reality that people have to think about."
George Soros has made his mark as an enormously successful spec­
ulator, wise enough to largely withdraw when still way ahead of the
game. The bulk of his enormous winnings is now devoted to encourag­
ing transitional and emerging nations to become "open societies,open
not only in the sense of freedom of commerce but—more important—
tolerant of new ideas and difierent modes of thinking and behavior.
At the same time, he has written with insight and passion about
the strains and instabilities that have accompanied—have in good part
been a consequence of—the globilization of financial markets. Over
and over again, he makes a point reminiscent of Valter Bagehots
nineteenth-century dictum that money cannot manage itself. In the
Soros view, "the belief that financial markets tend toward equiEbrium
and it is only government interference that prevents them from assur­
ing a best allocation of resources ... [is] both false and misleading." It is
in that critique that his intellectual efforts find application to the policy
and practical world of international finance.
--- Page 14 ---
Foreword to the New Edition xiii
George himself has been working to build upon the foundation of
acute observation and intellectual analysis a structure of workable and
broadly supported reform to better assure the growth and stability of
the emerging world. That has been the goal of other books and other
writings. No doubt there will be further efforts on his part.
For now, one thing seems to me certain: Soros has from his unique
perspective brought a clarity to deep-seated problems of international
finance that have been too little recognized in either the world of acad­
emia or that of policymakers. Approaches that would ignore the sys­
temic impEcations of his observations will, in my judgment, fail to
develop the full potential of globalized finance for well-developed and
underdeveloped economies aEke.
The Alchemy of Finance in its original, and even in its "succinct" and
“updated" new Introduction, isn't by any means a quick and easy read.
But what you read is what you get: an honest struggle by an indepen­
dent and searching mind to break through an old and stale orthodoxy
with new and meaningful insights into financial—and humanbehav­
ior. On almost every page, you will suddenly be rewarded by a para­
graph, a sentence, or a phrase that will provide fresh insight and
challenge your thinking. What remains is what George, or any of us,
can do to build new theories and new policy approaches that better re­
flect the reality he describes.
Paul A. Volcker
--- Page 16 ---
Foreword to
the First Edition
our hundred seventy-three million to one.Those are the odds against
F
George Soros compiling the investment record he did as the manager
of the Quantum Fund from 1968 through 1993. His investing record
is the most unimpeachable refutation of the random walk hypothesis ever!
As a trader coming of age in the latter half of the frenetic 1970s and
the 1980s, The Alchemy of Finance was somewhat of a revolutionary
book. Remember, this was the period when trend following and in­
dexation were the vogue in investing. It was a time when technical
analysis (the study of price movement as a forecasting tool) reached its
zenith. Traders of my generation armed themselves with charts and
computer-generated graphics that predicted future price direction. We
sat day after day in front of screens, mesmerized by blinking lights and
ever-changing numbers in a deafening cacophony of information over­
load. With the possible exception of Elliott Wave Theory, an intellectual
framework for understanding the course of social, political, and eco­
nomic events was noticeably forgotten in favor of just making sure that
one was part of the ever-quickening process.
The Alchemy of Finance was a shot out of the dark for me. It let me
take a giant step forward by first taking a step backwards, clarifying
events that appeared so complex and so overwhelming. During an era
when so much money was made in larger than life events, from the
Hunt brothers, squeeze of the silver market in 1979 to KKR's takeover
x v
--- Page 17 ---
x vi FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION
of RJR Nabisco in 1989, Mr. Soros s theory of reflexivity is the first
modern, nontechnical effort to describe and forecast the dynamic in­
terplay between the participants in the process. That is the brilliance of
this book. It describes the dynamics of the path between points of ex­
treme valuation and equilibrium in the marketplace. This is particularly
important for the average investor. How many times have we been cor­
rectly long near the bottom or short near the top of a major market
move? But our staying power with these positions has been weak (as
well as our returns) because of a lack of understanding of the path of
big price moves. Soros gives us critical insight into that path and thus
more confidence in our investments. This constitutes 70% of any suc­
cessful investing campaign.
When I enter the inevitable losing streak that befalls every investor,
I pick up The Alchemy and revisit Mr. Soros s campaigns. Studying how
he coped with adversity provides an excellent tutorial for breaking the
string of negative behaviors that occasionally besets any investor. Win­
ning is infectious. And this book is replete with examples of trading be­
haviors all would want to emulate. Importandy, Mr. Soross intellect
gives him the confidence and strength of his own convictions to stay
with his positions even during trying periods. In that sense, The Alchemy
joins Edwin Lefevres Reminiscences of a Stock Operator as a timeless in­
structional guide of the marketplace. And as such, Soros should beware!
In the World War II movie Patton, my favorite scene is when U.S. Gen­
eral George S. Patton has just spent weeks studying the writing of his
Germany adversary Field Marshall Erwin Rommel and is crushing him
in an epic tank battle in Tunisia. Patton, sensing victory as he peers onto
the battlefield from his command post, growls, “Rommel, you magnifi­
cent bastard. I read your bookT Enough said.
The Alchemy is also an excellent economic and political history of
recent times. From unknowingly providing a blueprint as to how the
savings and loan fiasco in the United States would be resolved six years
in advance (page 129) to predicting the stock market crash of 1987 two
years in advance (page 186), Soros reveals himself as the great market
visionary of our time.
History will probably remember Mr. Soros as the speculator who
tilted against the Bank of England in 1992 (and freed the English peo­
ple from recession). His billion-dollar score is simply too compelling a
story for scribes to overlook. Mr. Soros himself would probably like to
be remembered as a great economist or even scientist. But I am going
--- Page 18 ---
Foreword to the First Edition x vii
to remember him for something even more important, for which he
does not receive the credit he deserves. He is someone who genuinely
cares about the state of the human condition and tries to better it. His
myriad and monumental philanthropical efforts will qualify him as one
of history s great benefactors. Even today at age 62, he pursues the ac­
tivities of his six foundations with the vigor and work ethic of a young
turk on the way up the financial ladder, working 18-hour days around
the globe on behalf of his causes. He does not just write checks, which
any wealthy person can do. He is a hands-on workaholic who materi­
ally impacts the quality of the lives of people less fortunate than he.
Now this, this is a sign of greatness.
Paul Tudor Jones II
--- Page 20 ---
New Preface
uch has happened in the past few years to make the theory of re­
M
flexivity that is expounded in this book more relevant and more
acceptable. Financial markets have been in turmoil. The breaking of
the currency peg in Thailand in August 1997 unleashed a financial crisis
that spread from one country to another like a wrecking ball. The Russian
default in August 1998 put Long Term Capital Management, a hedge fund
operating on the efficient market hypothesis, into jeopardy and only the
timely intervention of the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew^ork prevented a
meltdown. Subsequently the spread of the Internet and other innovations
in information technology touched o任 a boom/bust sequence that was
eerily reminiscent of the conglomerate boom analyzed in this book. These
phenomena could not be reconciled with the theory of rational expecta­
tions and the hypothesis of efficient markets. Some academic economists
recognized the failure of the prevailing paradigm and started using more
realistic approaches. The concept of multiple equilibria begins to recog­
nize reflexivity as a phenomenon, although it fails to deal with it the right
way So the theory of reflexivity should not be as alien to the thinking of
academic economists as it was at the time the book was first published.
Vet the theory of reflexivity has made surprisingly few inroads into
public discourse. The prevailing view remains that leaving financial
markets to their own devices will assure the optimum allocation of re­
sources. Indeed, market fundamentalism has become even more influ­
ential than it was 15 years ago.
Undoubtedly I must accept responsibility for having failed to com­
municate my ideas efiectively.The central thesis, that the bias prevailing
x i x
--- Page 21 ---
X X NEW PREFACE
in the financial markets can affect the so-called fundamentals that mar­
kets are supposed to reflect, does not seem to have registered. I feel
obliged to make another try at explaining my view of the world. My
own thinking has also evolved in the past 15 years, and I ought to be
able to explain myself better.
Accordingly, I have written a comprehensive new Introduction that
replaces the original Introduction as well as what was Chapter 1 of the
book. I have left the rest of the text entirely untouched. After 15 years
in print, there is some merit in exposing it to the test of time. I believe
it passes that test quite well.
The new Introduction is rather dense but that cannot be helped
because it deals with highly abstract philosophical ideas. My goal is very
ambitious: I seek to lay the groundwork for a new paradigm that is ap­
plicable not only to financial markets but to all social phenomena.
My comments fall under four main headings. First, I try to make my
critique of the prevailing equilibrium theories about financial markets
more complete and conclusive and establish the case for a paradigm
shift. In this context, I also examine the weaknesses in my original argu­
ments. Then I lay the groundwork for a new paradigm based on the
recognition that our understanding never corresponds to reality, and the
divergence~which varies from person to person and case to case―is an
important but not determining factor in shaping the course of events.
The implications of this paradigm reach far beyond the financial mar­
kets. Finally, I explore the alchemy—as distinct from science—of finance
further. In the book I conducted a real-time experiment that gave a
blow-by-blow account of my investment decisions over a period of
time, but I did not delve into my own decision-making process; on this
occasion I shall make an attempt to reveal "the secret of my success."
George Soros
--- Page 22 ---
The Alchemy
of Finance
--- Page 24 ---
New I*ntroduction
CRITIQUE OF THE PREVAILING PARADIGM
I started the original introduction by saying that in a very real sense this
book represents my lifes work. This remains true today Although my
sphere of activities has expanded from the financial to the social and poEt-
ical, I apply the same conceptxial framework to those fields as I do to the
financial markets. That is why I am so keen to bring the book up to date
and to incorporate in it what I have learned in the past 15 years. Under­
standing reality; and financial markets in particular, is a never-ending
process. With the benefit of hindsight, I can see many weaknesses in my
previous exposition; rather than correcting them, I shall try to provide a
succinct statement of my current thinking on the subject.
First, I must specify what the subject is.The book is about financial
markets but my lifes work is not confined to that arena. I was interested
in philosophy long before I became engaged in financial markets. As I
wrote in the original Introduction, <cThe abstract came first. Ever since
I became conscious of my existence I have had a passionate interest in
understanding it, and I regarded my own understanding as the central
problem that needed to be understood.,, I developed a theoretical
framework based on the concept of reflexivity to explain the relation­
ship between thinking and reality, and I used the financial markets as a
laboratory to test my theory It is in that sense that this book constitutes
my lifes work. I hope that this summing up will bring it to fruition.
