*The New Introduction replaces the Introduction and Chapter 1 from the first edition.
--- Page 25 ---
2 NEW INTRODUCTION
In recent years, my attention has veered in other directions. First I
became engaged in the transition from closed to open societies that was
made possible by the collapse of the Soviet system. More recently I
have become preoccupied with the problems of globalization. It would
be inappropriate to discuss these subjects in detail here, especially as I
have written about them in other books. However, I feel obliged to re­
state the conceptual framework with which I have approached both
problem areas——the transition to open society and globalization.
The Concept of Reflexivity
The concept of reflexivity is very simple. In situations that have think­
ing participants, there is a two-way interaction between the partici­
pants5 thinking and the situation in which they participate. On the one
hand, participants seek to understand reality; on the other, they seek to
bring about a desired outcome. The two functions work in opposite di­
rections: in the cognitive function reality is the given; in the participat­
ing function, the participants' understanding is the constant. The two
functions can interfere with each other by rendering what is supposed
to be given, contingent. I call the interference between the two func­
tions “reflexivity.'' I envision reflexivity as a feedback loop between the
participants' understanding and the situation in which they participate,
and I contend that the concept of reflexivity is crucial to understanding
situations that have thinking participants. Reflexivity renders the par-
ticipants, understanding imperfect and ensures that their actions will
have unintended consequences.
The nature of the interference between the cognitive and participat­
ing functions is not so simple, and its implications are still not properly
understood. The assertion that our understanding of the world in which
we live is imperfect is so banal that it hardly needs any elaboration. The
way our senses work, the way our language is structured, and many
other factors combine to render our understanding imperfect; but the
imperfection introduced by reflexivity is more specific and needs further
elucidation. The imperfection I am concerned with arises because we
are participants. When we act as outside observers we can make state­
ments that do or do not correspond to the facts without altering the
facts; when we act as participants, our actions alter the situation we seek
to understand. As a consequence, we cannot base our decisions on
knowledge. We may know many things, and the more we know the bet­
--- Page 26 ---
New Introduction 3
ter we are placed to make the right decisions, but knowledge alone is
not a sufficient basis for making decisions. We are confronted with a sit­
uation that is inherently unknowable in the sense that what needs to be
a fact to make knowledge possible is, in fact, contingent on the partici­
pantsJ view of the situation. If the participants, views corresponded to
the situation, the situation would not be unknowable and participants
could act on the basis of knowledge. But that is not the case. The situa­
tion is unknowable because the participants' views do not correspond to
the situation. If this seems like circular logic, well, it is. Participants are
caught in a situation characterized by a circular feedback I have called
reflexivity, and trying to understand it forces them—and us, observers
who seek to understand situations that have thinking participants—into
circular logic. That is the point that requires further elucidation.
The traditional correspondence theory of truth sees knowledge as
being expressed by true statements. The statement X is true and only
if the fact described by X actually happens. Facts have to be independent
of the statements that refer to them in order to constitute a reliable crite­
rion of truth. But the participants' decisions relate to the future, and the
fiiture is contingent on the participants' decisions in the present. There­
fore, future facts do not constitute an independent criterion by which the
current thinking of the participants could be qualified as knowledge.
Even if the outcome happened to correspond to some participants' ex­
pectations, that would not qualify those expectations as knowledge be­
cause the correspondence may have been brought about by the various
participants' decisions.To claim that expectations are based on knowledge
is to deny that reflexivity plays any role in shaping the course of events.
Reflexivity and Economic Theory
The assertion that future outcomes are fully reflected in current expec­
tations seems absurd, yet it is very much alive. It is at the basis of the
prevailing paradigm in financial economics. Market prices are seen as
passive reflections of the underlying fundamentals. The efficient market
hypothesis claims that market prices fully reflect all extant information.
The closely related rational expectations theory holds that, in the ab­
sence of exogenous shocks, financial markets tend toward an equilib­
rium that accurately reflects the participants' expectations. Tbgethet,
these theories support the belief that financial markets, left to their own
devices, assure the optimum allocation of resources.
--- Page 27 ---
4 NEW INTRODUCTION
This paradigm is in deep trouble; the idea that financial markets tend
toward such an equilibrium seems to be contradicted by the evidence.
Most economists now recognize that financial markets are capable of pro­
ducing multiple equilibria. "Yet the idea that free, unregulated markets as­
sure the optimum allocation of resources has not been abandoned. Great
efforts have gone into reconciling the actual behavior of financial markets
with the efficient market hypothesis, adopting ever more elastic defini­
tions of rationality and ever more modest definitions of efficiency These
modifications do not go far enough. It is time for a paradigm shift.
The Alchemy of Finance was meant to be a frontal assault on the pre­
vailing paradigm, but it ran into a stone wall. Professional economists
dismissed the theory of reflexivity as the work of an amateur whose fi­
nancial success has gone to his head. I was accused either of ignoring
the latest advances in economic theory or of restating the obvious. No
doubt, I have to bear some of the responsibility. I gave my critics a wide
opening by freely admitting that I was not familiar with the theories of
rational expectations and efficient markets because, as a practitioner, I
felt I was better off without them. My exposition also suffered from
other limitations that I need not belabor here because readers will be
able to judge for themselves. Nevertheless, the theory of reflexivity has
gained ground among practitioners, and The Alchemy of Finance, with all
its shortcomings, has found a place in the reading lists of business
schools as distinct from economics departments.
I should like to use this opportunity to drive my critique of the old
paradigm home. I may be flogging a dead horse by now but the exercise
is necessary because the prevailing paradigm has become deeply in­
grained in peoples thinking. Even as the experts have modified their
views, public policy in the United States and elsewhere is still guided by
the belief that financial markets tend toward an equilibrium that assures
the best allocation of resources and it is only government interference
that stands in the way I have called this dogma 4 "market fundamental-
ism" and it remains very influential.
Let me first dispose of the theory of rational expectations. The the­
ory, as I understand it, asserts that market participants, in pursuing their
self-interest, base their decisions on the assumption that the other par­
ticipants will do the same. This sounds reasonable, but it isn't, because
participants act not on the basis of their best interests but on their per-
ception of their best interests, and the two are not identical. Their under­
standing is imperfect and their actions have unintended consequences.
--- Page 28 ---
New Introduction 5
There is a lack of correspondence between expectations and out­
comes—between ex ante and ex post—and it is not rational for people
to act on the assumption that there is no divergence between the two.1
Rational expectations theory seeks to overcome this difficulty by
claiming that the market as a whole always knows more than any individ­
ual participantufficiently so that markets manage to be always right.
People may get things wrong, and misunderstandings may cause random
disturbances; but in the ultimate analysis all market participants use the
same model of how the world works, and when they do not, they learn
from experience so that in the end they converge on the same model. I
work with a different model, and the fact that I have been successful using
it as a market participant makes nonsense out of rational expectations.
I contend that financial markets are always wrong in the sense that
they operate with a prevailing bias, but the bias can actually validate it­
self by influencing not only market prices but also the so-called funda­
mentals that market prices are supposed to reflect. That is the point that
people steeped in the prevailing paradigm have such difficulty grasping.
The ways in which the prevailing bias can validate itself are dis­
cussed in detail in the book, with many concrete examples. Beyond a
certain point the self-validating feedback loops become unsustainable.
That is how reflexivity gives rise to initially self-fulfilling but eventually
self-defeating prophesies and processes.The most spectacular manifesta­
tion is in the boom/bust sequences that are characteristic of financial
markets. The theory of reflexivity can explain such bubbles, while the
eflficient market hypothesis cannot. A whole new literature has sprung
up to explain away bubbles within the prevailing paradigm. But bubbles
are not the only manifestations of reflexivity There are also many sub­
tler forms described in the book, such as Reagans Imperial Circle or
the mergermania of the 1980s. They cannot be explained without dis­
carding the efficient market hypothesis.
We can see, then, that the efficient market hypothesis and the the­
ory of reflexivity are alternative theories about the behavior of finan­
cial markets. The efficient market hypothesis does not fit the facts, and
it is also questionable on theoretical grounds: the illusion that markets
are always right is created by the reflexive interaction between the par­
ticipating and cognitive functions. In fact, markets are almost always
wrong but their bias is validated during both the self-fulfilling and the
self-defeating phases of boom/bust sequences. Only at inflection
points is the prevailing bias proven wrong.
--- Page 29 ---
NEW INTRODUCTION
It is an interesting question why such an unrealistic interpretation
of financial markets as the efficient market hypothesis should have
gained such widespread acceptance. The answer is to be found in the
requirements of economic theory as a scientific pursuit. Scientific theo­
ries are supposed to have some predictive value, and the efficient mar­
ket hypothesis seeks to meet that requirement, while the theory of
reflexivity does not. On the contrary, it contends that the course of
events is inherently unpredictable. Thus, the former qualifies as a scien­
tific theory (albeit a false one) while the latter does not. I have ac­
knowledged this fact by entitling my book The Alchemy of Finance, as
distinct from science.
It would be difficult for a nonscientific theory to falsify a scientific
one without a far-reaching reconsideration of scientific method as it
applies to human affairs in general and financial markets in particular. I
have attempted such a reevaluation in The Alchemy of Finance, but I can­
not claim to have made much of an impression. I consider the issue so
important for understanding not only financial markets but human af­
fairs in general that I feel obliged to try again.
The Human Uncertainty Principle
We live in the real world, but our view of the world does not corre­
spond to the real world. The theory of rational expectations itself pro­
vides a striking example of how far our interpretation can stray from the
real world. Yet our view of the world is part of the real world~we are
participants. And the gap between reality and our interpretation of it in­
troduces an element of uncertainty into the real world. Again, this
sounds like circular reasoning, but it accurately describes situations with
thinking participants.
I can now define the element of uncertainty better than I did in
the original edition of The Alchemy of Finance. Invoking both the corre­
spondence and coherence theories of truth, I can proclaim what I call
the "human uncertainty principle." That principle holds that peoples
understanding of the world in which they live cannot correspond to
the facts and be complete and coherent at the same time. Insofar as
peoples thinking is confined to the facts, it is not sufficient to reach de­
cisions; and insofar as it serves as the basis of decisions, it cannot be
confined to the facts. The human uncertainty principle applies to both
thinking and reality: It ensures that our understanding is often incoher­
--- Page 30 ---
New Introduction
ent and always incomplete and introduces an element of genuine un­
certainty—as distinct from randomness―into the course of events.
The human uncertainty principle bears a strong resemblance to
Heisenbergs uncertainty principle, which holds that the position and mo­
mentum of quantum particles cannot be measured at the same time. But
there is an important difference. Heisenbergs uncertainty principle does
not influence the behavior of quantum particles one iota; they would be­
have the same way if the principle had never been discovered. The same is
not true of the human uncertainty principle. Theories about human be­
havior can and do influence human behavior. Marxism had a tremendous
impact on history and market fundamentalism is having a similar influ­
ence today A phrase like "the axis of evil" can alter the course of history;
and calling the estate tax “the death tax" can influence public policy My
own actions―and my performance in the financial markets~would have
been different if they had not been based on the human uncertainty prin­
ciple (although I had not yet given it that name).
Just as quantum physics is subject to alternative interpretations—
quanta can be described as particles or as waves― o it is with the hu­
man uncertainty principle. We may speak of imperfect understanding
but it may be more appropriate to speak of human creativity. Imperfect
understanding has a negative sound; creativity is more inspiring. If per­
fect understanding were possible, there would be no room for creativity
As it is, the world in which we live is, to some extent, our own creation.
The extent to which peoples thinking shapes reality requires further
examination.There is a tendency to deconstruct reality into peoples per­
ception of reality This is an overreaction to a previous tendency to inter­
pret reality as being governed by the inexorable laws of science, which
are capable of being discovered and prevail irrespective of what anybody
thinks. Reality is more compEcated. To understand it properly we must
distinguish between natural phenomena that are impervious to what
people think and social phenomena that contain thinking participants.
The laws that apply to natural phenomena operate independently
of what anybody thinks—although the formulation of the laws and the
selection of the phenomena to which they apply are very much influ­
enced by prevailing areas in science. The availability of an independent
criterion by which the validity of scientific hypotheses can be judged
has been a boon to scientific method. Natural science has, in fact, pro­
duced many more amazing results than those wrought by magic, super­
stition, or religious beliefs.
--- Page 31 ---
8 NEW INTRODUCTION
When it comes to events that have human participants, scientific
knowledge is more difficult to attain, and thinking plays a more active,
creative role, both in understanding them and in shaping them. As we
have seen, people base their actions not on reality but on their view of
the world, and the two are not identical. As a result even past history
cannot be treated in the same way as natural phenomena because it
does not consist only of hard facts like the birth and death of kings.
Social situations like revolutions or political compromises have differ­
ent meanings for difierent participants, and even after the event they
are subject to different interpretations.2 Myths about the past have a
bearing on the future. The battle of Kosovo in 1389 loomed large in
the recent breakup of Yugoslavia. This poses problems for scientific
method, but at the same time renders scientific knowledge less impor­
tant in the understanding and shaping of human affairs. History is a
story, and there is plenty of room for magic, superstition, rehgion, and
other beliefs.
Since peoples decisions are not based on knowledge, outcomes are
liable to diverge from expectations. Events that have thinking partici­
pants cannot be understood without taking that divergence into ac­
count. In the case of natural phenomena, events unfold irrespective of
what anybody thinks—although what people choose to notice is influ­
enced by the prevailing paradigm. In the case of social events, the influ­
ence of thinking is more pervasive: it can affect the course of events.
This has far-reaching implications for scientific method.
Social versus Natural Science
The standards and criteria of scientific method are based on the
achievements of natural science. Karl Popper~who has greatly influ­
enced my thinking—proclaimed the doctrine of the unity of science:
the same standards and criteria apply to both the natural and the social
sciences? And he was not alone. The achievements of the natural sci­
ences were so impressive that the social sciences sought to imitate
them. Not all of the social sciences—for instance, anthropology insists
on telling stories rather than establishing universally valid theories—
but economic theory in particular has made a valiant effort to imitate
natural science.
I disagree with my mentor, Karl Popper, on the doctrine of the
unity of science. There are two fundamental differences between the so­
--- Page 32 ---
New Introduction 9
cial and the natural sciences. One relates to the subject matter, the other
to the role of the scientist. First, reflexivity and the human uncertainty
principle interfere with the predictability of human behavior; second,
theories about human behavior can and do influence human behavior.
Given these handicaps, imposing the standards and criteria of nat­
ural science on the human sciences gives rise to false claims and mis­
leading results. It encourages theories such as rational expectations that
do not correspond to reality, and it disqualifies the theory of reflexivity
because it does not yield the predictions expected of scientific theory.
Yet if there is an element of uncertainty in the underlying phenomena,
it ought to be reflected in the theories that deal with them.
Heisenbergs uncertainty principle did not undermine the status of
natural science because natural science had produced some truly amaz­
ing results before the uncertainty inherent in quantum physics was en­
countered. In the light of those discoveries, Heisenbergs uncertainty
principle appears as a crowning achievement of scientific method. The
human sciences find themselves in a much more unfavorable position
because they encounter the element of uncertainty inherent in the par­
ticipants * thinking at the very beginning of their enquiry, not when
their quest is already well-advanced. They can postpone the day of
reckoning, as economics has done, by building their theories on postu­
lates that deliberately exclude that uncertainty but by doing so they are
doing violence to their subject matter.
Why did Popper embrace the doctrine of the unity of science
when he was at least as aware of the principle of human uncertainty as
I am? I believe he did so because he wanted to show that Marxism is
unscientific and he needed the doctrine to make the argument stick.
But that does not mitigate the fact that he employed the wrong argu­
ment. It would have been much better to establish that the social sci­
ences cannot meet the standards and requirements of natural science
because of the two handicaps I have identified; therefore, those social
theories that base their claim to validity on their scientific status are
making a false claim. That is not to say that social theories cannot be
valid, but they must establish their claim to validity on their own merit
and not by parading in the false feathers of natural science.
This is not an arcane theoretical argument. It has great practical rel­
evance right now. The same critique that Popper raised against Marx­
ism can be applied to mainstream economics. Many economic theories
such as the theory of perfect competition cannot be disproved, because
--- Page 33 ---
10 NEW INTRODUCTION
they are based on certain specified assumptions and the conclusions fol­
low from the assumptions by deductive logic. Many thoughtful econo­
mists have made this point perfectly clear, but market fundamentalists
have found it convenient to ignore the difference between the artificial
world created by those postulates and reality.
Todays ideology of market fundamentalism was known as laissez
faire in the nineteenth century. It is once again very influential by
virtue of its influence on the policies of the United States and the so-
called Washington consensus. Its dominance cannot be compared
with the paramount position that Marxism used to enjoy in the So­
viet Union because the United States is a democratic country but the
two ideologies have one feature in common: they both base their
claim to validity on the authority of science. Without holding eco­
nomic theory responsible for the sins of market fundamentalism, I
must contest that claim.
I consider market fundamentalism a dangerous ideology—more
dangerous today than Marxism because Marxism has been discredited
while market fundamentalism is the ideology that underlies the global­
ization of financial markets. I have been at pains to point out the ex­
cesses and deficiencies of globalization, but every time I criticize
market fundamentalism I have to go through the argument that I have
presented here to show that financial markets do not tend toward a ra­
tional expectations equilibrium. That would not be necessary if the im­
plications of reflexivity and the principle of human uncertainty were
generally accepted.
SELF-CRITIQUE
Judging by the published reviews, the concept of reflexivity as presented
in The Alchemy of Finance has not been properly understood. I should like
to use this occasion to correct some of the shortcomings of the original
presentation. Many reviews described reflexivity by saying that prevailing
sentiments greatly influence market prices. If that were all, I would be in­
deed belaboring the obvious. What makes reflexivity interesting is that
the prevailing bias has ways, via the market prices, to affect the so-called
fundamentals that market prices are supposed to reflect. Only when the
fundamentals are affected does reflexivity become significant enough to
influence the course of events. It does not happen all the time, but when
--- Page 34 ---
New Introduction 1 1
it does it gives rise to the boom/bust sequences and other far-from-
equilibrium conditions that are so typical of financial markets.
Terminology
With the benefit of hindsight I have to admit that my terminology in
expounding the theory of reflexivity is somewhat confusing. I use the
term "reflexivity'' to describe both the two-way feedback mechanism
between the cognitive and participating functions and the boom/bust
process in financial markets. Both uses are legitimate: the boom/bust
process is a particular manifestation of a more general relationship. But
it is not the only manifestation; it is only the most spectacular one.
There are many other, more subtle reflexive connections and there are
times when the reflexive connections are so feeble that they can be dis­
regarded altogether.
Let me try to clarify matters. The relationship between the cogni­
tive and participating functions is a universal condition; but the two-
way interaction between the participants' bias and the fundamentals
occurs only intermittently and it takes different forms at difierent
times. In the book I identify such interactions but I do not have a good
word to describe them. To speak of reflexivity is too weak because it
can be taken to refer to a universal condition; to speak of initially seU
reinforcing but eventually self-defeating processes is just too long;
therefore I use the term "boom/bust" even where it is not, strictly
speaking, appropriate. This is a source of confusion.
I do not have a ready solution. Since writing the book I have started
speaking of4<far-from-equilibrium,J conditions as distinct from "near-
equilibrium,, situations. But this terminology is not entirely satisfactory
either, because what characterizes a boom/bust process is exactly that it
passes from near-equilibrium to far-from-equilibrium conditions and it
is difficult to decide when the transition occurs. Nevertheless, I wish I
had thought of these terms at the time I wrote the book. The lack of a
suitable terminology affected not only the presentation but also the
analysis. In retrospect I find that I laid too much emphasis on the
boom/bust model. I identify some pure cases (see Chapter 1), and they
are very convincing. But then I went on to develop a credit and regula­
tory cycle (Chapter 3) which is less satisfactory
The underlying ideas of the latter are valid. There is a reflexive con­
nection between the act of lending and the value of the collateral, and
--- Page 35 ---
1 2 NEW INTRODUCTION
it is the liquidation of credit that gives the boom/bust model its asym­
metric shape: slowly rising and abruptly falling. Similarly, there is a re­
flexive interaction betrween regulators and the economy they regulate,
and financial crises usually lead to a tightening of regulations. Both
these ideas are incorporated in the boom/bust model, but they do not
add up to a grand pattern of credit and regulatory cycles. By looking
for such a pattern I weakened my argument.
Reflexivity is the rule, not the exception. If that were not the case,
the spectacular bubbles that occasionally occur would be difficult to ex­
plain. But reflexivity may also manifest itself in other forms. I discuss such
non-boom/bust phenomena in the book. Freely floating exchange rates
(Chapter 2) tend to produce wavelike patterns. Reagans Imperial Circle
(Chapter 6) was an initially self^reinfbrcing but eventually unsustainable
process that did not follow a boom/bust pattern. And the mergermania
that swept through the American corporate scene in the mid-1980s
(Chapter 8) differed in character from the conglomerate boom described
in Chapter 1. There were no boom/bust sequences during the real-time
experiment I recorded in Part Three, yet I kept looking for it. This was a
defect not only in the book but also in my investment decisions at the
time. I might have avoided it with a different terminology: This is an ex­
ample of how misconceptions can influence reality
Power
I have discovered another shortcoming in the book recently after
reading Mancur Olsons Power and Prosperity4:1 did not give sufficient
weight to power relations. My first objective in The Alchemy of Finance
was to disprove the prevailing paradigm, the equilibrium model of
financial markets. For this purpose, I accepted the economists, de­
scription of financial markets as a free exchange among willing par­
ticipants. Using that starting point, I succeeded in showing that,
far from tending to rational expectations equilibrium, financial mar­
kets lend themselves to initially self^reinforcing but eventually self-
defeating processes. Changes in the political, institutional, and regulatory
environment play a crucial role in these processes, particularly at in­
flection points. For instance, the conglomerate boom of the late 1960s
reached its apogee when Saul Steinberg tried to take over Chemical
Bank and the estabEshment united against him; the crash of 1929 led
to the Glass-Steagal Act, and the bust beginning in March 2000 to the
--- Page 36 ---
New Introduction
Sarbanes-Oxley Act. These are political developments; they cannot be
described as a free exchange among willing participants. While I took
full notice of them in my description of individual boom/bust
processes, I did not make it clear that more is involved in financial
markets than free exchange: power and politics play an important role.
This is a serious analytical defect that detracts from the theory of fi­
nancial markets as presented in the book.
The neglect of power relations is especially noticeable when the book
deals with the evolution of the global financial system: "The International
Debt Problem" and "The Collective System of Lending55 (Chapters 4 and
5). One of the major tenets of my recent book On Globalization (Public-
Affairs, 2002) is the inherent disparity between center and periphery The
center consists of countries that can borrow in financial markets in their
own currencies; the periphery is constituted by those countries that can­
not. The disparity arises because the countries at the center control the in­
ternational financial institutions: when threatened by recession, they
themselves can follow countercyclical policies; but countries that depend
on the support of the International Monetary Fund cannot indulge in
such luxuries. The primary interest of the IMF is to protect the system;
maintaining economic activity in the periphery countries comes second.
While the disparity between center and periphery was subsumed in the
discussion, it was never made explicit. As a result, The Alchemy of Finance
does not provide a coherent analysis of globalization. This is particularly
relevant to Part Two: Historical Perspective.
The globalization of financial markets was a market fundamentalist
project. Its aim was to constrain the ability of national governments to in­
terfere in the economy by making it easy for financial capital to move
around internationally and making it difficult for national governments to
tax it and regulate it. Financial capital is an essential ingredient of produc­
tion, and it will seek to go where it is best rewarded. National govern­
ments must therefore compete to attract and retain international capital.
As a market fundamentalist project, globalization has been highly
successful. The taxation and regulation of financial assets have in fact
been greatly reduced, and the return on capital has been significantly
increased. That engendered a global bull market that lasted—with
minor interruptions—from the early 1980s to the year 2000. In the
emerging markets, it came to an end earlier, in 1997. The greatest
beneficiaries were the countries that initiated it: the United States
and the United Kingdom. They earned a great deal of money by
--- Page 37 ---
1 4 NEW INTRODUCTION
providing financial services to the world. They also attracted a signif­
icant portion of the worlds savings, as witnessed by the large and in­
creasing current account deficit of the United States: it now amounts
to an amazing $500 billion a year.
Taking power relations into account would undermine the market
fundamentalist case even more than showing that financial markets are
inherently unstable. Market fundamentalists insinuate that markets have
a moral quality about them by allowing the diligent and creative partic­
ipants to come out ahead. This argument always sufiered from neglect­
ing the social injustice of unequal initial endowments; but it is entirely
destroyed if financial markets do not merely permit free exchange but
promote the dominance of the powerful. As I have pointed out else­
where,5 the distinguishing feature of financial markets is that they are
amoral; that is one of the factors that make them so efficient. But soci­
ety cannot exist without morality; therefore it cannot rely exclusively
on market discipline. Market fundamentalism is a convenient ideology
for the rich and powerful.
The omission of power relations also makes it impossible to un­
derstand the present moment in history There is a dominant group
within the Bush administration that believes that international rela­
tions are relations of power, not law, and the United States, being the
most powerful state, has the right to impose its will on the rest of the
world. They held this belief before September 11,2001, and, to the ex­
tent they could, they acted upon it. They renounced international
treaties and sought to make American military power absolute by mil­
itarizing space. But they were constrained by the lack of a clear politi­
cal mandate from the voters. The terrorist attacks on September 11,
2001, changed that. The Bush administration can now claim to be act­
ing in self-defense and carry the nation behind it.
The beliefs of this dominant group are incorporated in the Bush
doctrine. It is built on two pillars: first, the United States must do what­
ever is necessary to maintain its unquestioned military dominance, and,
second, the United States reserves the right to engage in preemptive
strikes. I believe this is a dangerous doctrine. Carried to its logical con­
clusion, the Bush doctrine establishes two classes of sovereignty in the
world: the sovereignty of the United States, which is sacrosanct and not
subject to limitations imposed by international law and the sovereignty
of other states, which is subject to the Bush doctrine.This carries echoes
of George Orwell's Animal Farm: all animals are equal but the pigs are more
--- Page 38 ---
New Introduction 1 5
equal than the others. Even i£ under the influence of September 11, the
American public went along with the Bush doctrine, the rest of the
world could never accept it. Therefore it will have to be enforced by the
use of military power.
The attitude of this dominant group can be described as a crude
form of social Darwinism: the survival of the fittest in a world char­
acterized by the struggle for survival. In the markets, the struggle
is among individuals and enterprises; in geopolitics it is among
states. This is a distorted view of the world. It emphasizes competi­
tion to the exclusion of cooperation. Yet, without cooperation there
would be no laws, no markets, no civilization. Until recently, I was
inveighing against market fundamentalism, which I considered a
greater current threat than Marxism. Now I regard the ideologues of
American supremacy as even more dangerous than market funda­
mentalists. What I am afraid of is that the pursuit of American su­
premacy may be successful for a while because the United States in
fact enjoys a dominant position in the world today. However, it will
fail in the long run because the concept is flawed. If the Bush doc­
trine passes some early tests successfully, it may give rise to a
boom/bust process with much more devastating consequences than
a purely financial crash.6
A Negative Approach
By far the greatest shortcoming of the original book was that it was
couched almost entirely in negative terms: imperfect understanding,
human uncertainty inability to match the achievements of natural sci­
ence, and so on. It is easy to see why this should be so. I was trying to
discredit a certain way of thinking by using the categories created by
that way of thinking. No wonder that I had to take a negative view of
those categories. I felt I had no alternative because the conceptual
framework I was seeking to replace was so pervasive that there were no
other categories available that would have been readily comprehensible
to the reader.
When I speak of categories I could not avoid using, I have in mind
the dichotomy between statements and facts, thinking and reality. Us­
ing these dichotomies is appropriate to natural phenomena, which oc­
cur independently of what anybody thinks or says, but not to social
phenomena in which the participants5 thinking plays a formative role.
--- Page 39 ---
16 NEW INTRODUCTION
Nevertheless these dichotomies have become so deeply ingrained in
our way of thinking that it is difficult to avoid them.
The distinction between statements and facts is a very fruitful one.
It is the foundation of logic because it creates an independent criterion
by which the truth of statements can be judged. It also plays a very im­
portant role in the acquisition of scientific knowledge, although that
role has been exaggerated. The distinction applies only in natural sci­
ence where facts and statements do indeed belong to separate uni­
verses; in the case of social science it distorts reality
In natural science thinking is supposed to play a purely passive role.
The universe of facts is supposed to be governed by laws of universal
validity, and the task of science is to discover them. Karl Popper has
shown that this is not, strictly speaking, true because the laws of science
are hypothetical in character and there is an element of intuition or in­
vention in the formulation of hypotheses. Nevertheless it is accurate to
say that the role of thinking in natural science is purely passive in the
sense that statements can only reflect (or fail to reflect) the facts; they
cannot affect them.
The universe that forms the subject matter of social science is dif­
ferent. It has participants whose thinking both reflects and affects the
situation in which they participate. Thinking and reality cannot be
treated as separate categories, because they are interconnected in a re­
flexive fashion: thinking is part of the reality people have to think
about.The subject is also the object, as in certain French verbs (e.g., il se
lave), which are called reflexive.
Reflexivity has been strangely neglected in economic theory By
taking the demand supply curves as given, economic theory can treat
market prices as a mere reflection of the underlying fundamentals (i.e.,
supply) and the participants' preferences (i.e., demand).This leaves out
of account the active, creative, and distortive effect of the participants'
imperfect understanding. It gives a very misleading picture of financial
markets. For instance, it implies that investors base their decisions on
the fundamentals, whereas the goal of market participants is to make
money. Only if market prices reflected the fundamentals accurately
would it make sense for them to be guided by those fundamentals—
and in that case, nobody could make more money than anybody else
and everyone ought to invest in index funds. This is an absurd conclu­
sion, yet it is still widely accepted.
Criticizing the prevailing paradigm is not enough. The theory of
--- Page 40 ---
New Introduction 1
reflexivity ought to provide some positive insight into the way financial
markets work in order to serve as the basis of a new paradigm.
THE NEW PARADIGM
I have used the term reflexivity to indicate that understanding and par­
ticipating are interconnected. So far I have iocused on the negative im­
plications of reflexivity explaining how the two functions interfere
with each other. Now I must face up to the challenge of exploring
how the two functions can be best performed in the light of that inter­
ference. That means finding a positive way of studying social situa­
tions—and even more importantly, of participating in them—as
opposed to explaining why they cannot be treated in the same way as
natural phenomena. It requires a new paradigm that differs from the old
one in acknowledging that the separation between thinking and reality
is not as watertight as in natural science.
The new paradigm cannot treat facts as if they constituted reality
and statements as if they constituted thinking. Instead of drawing di­
chotomies between thinking and reality, we must recognize that think­
ing forms part of reality instead of being separate from it. This
integrated reality cannot be described by statements that are separate
and independent of it. Such statements would immediately accrue to
the subject matter, enlarging it and requiring additional statements to
correspond to it. The dichotomy between thinking and reality is itself
something that was not discovered but rather invented by us in our at­
tempt to understand reality; as such, it became part of reality and ren­
dered reality more difficult to understand. In other words, reality always
exceeds our capacity to understand it. Godels theorem provides a proof
of this point for arithmetics. The method Godel used was to assign so-
called Godel numbers to all arithmetic truths. He was then able to
show that the number of arithmetic truths is always greater than the
number of proofs. Arithmetical reality exceeds our capacity to under­
stand it. A neat theorem!7
Now that we have come to understand this point, we need to in­
vent a new way of dealing with reality or more exactly that part of re-
aEty that has thinking participants. The dichotomy between statements
and facts proved very fruitful in the study of natural phenomena, which
consist of nothing but facts. We must take a difierent approach in the
--- Page 41 ---
1 8 NEW INTRODUCTION
study of reflexive phenomena, which contain both statements and facts.
Since thinking and reality are interconnected, it seems advisable to take
an integrated rather than an analytical approach. By that I mean that in­
stead of looking for timelessly and universally valid laws that govern so­
cial situations, we should accept that we, with our imperfect
understanding, play a role in governing them. Our participation gives
reality a difierent character from the one with which we are familiar
from natural science.
To establish the new paradigm I could take two avenues. One is to
approach reality from the position of a detached observer; the other is
to approach it from the inside, as a market participant. I shall explore
both avenues. The first approach can be described as an attempt to re­
duce an infinitely complex reality to something comprehensible. What
makes the attempt difficult, and reality infinitely complex, is that the
various attempts to accomplish that task are themselves part of reality:
The second approach leads to some interesting revelations about man­
aging a hedge fund, and it is an easy read.
Having already tried the patience of the reader with my philosophi­
cal musings and meanderings, I would have preferred to give you the in­
side scoop on financial markets first. But there is more to be said from
the point of view of the detached observer; so be prepared for another
dose of philosophy I realize that I may be losing you; in that case, please
turn to page 35 where I return to the financial markets.
The "Shoelace" and "Ziplock" Theories
Obviously the new paradigm has to be based on reflexivity and the hu­
man uncertainty principle.8 To enable the principle to play that role it
must be converted from a negative statement into a positive assertion.
That can be accomplished by replacing the lack of correspondence be­
tween people's views and the actual state of affairs with the assertion
that there is a divergence between the two. This renders the assertion op­
erational: it gives us two variables—the ex-ante expectations and the ex-
post outcome—and it directs us to study the relationship between
them. The divergence between expectations and outcomes provides the
key to understanding history—and I interpret financial markets as a
historical process. There are as many expectations as there are partici­
pants, but there is only one outcome. It is that outcome that constitutes
reality, and it is reaEty that needs to be understood. It cannot be under­
--- Page 42 ---
New Introduction 1 9
stood, however, without taking into account expectations, both in lead­
ing up to the outcome and in being part of that outcome.
The benefit of this approach is that it focuses our attention on the
divergence between outcomes and expectations. Outcomes are affected
but not determined by expectations. There is a two-way feedback loop
between them: the cognitive function runs from outcomes to expecta­
tions, the participating function from expectations to outcomes. Both
functions operate continuously and in opposite directions. The arrow
of causation does not run from one set of outcomes to the next; it
crisscrosses from outcomes to expectations and vice versa. I have called
this the "shoelace theory of history."
I need to specify what I mean by outcomes in this context. Nor­
mally, outcomes are meant to be observable, that is to say objective,
facts. If one adopted that definition, the "shoelace” would connect the
objective and subjective aspects of reality. I do not think that gives an
accurate picture of the relationship between thinking and reality be­
cause it puts too much emphasis on the objective aspect. Thinking is
not confined to observable facts. People think of all aspects of reality
not only the objective one and they care a lot about what others
think, lb give a more accurate picture, the outcome should include
not only observable facts but all aspects of reality including the think­
ing of the participants.
We can achieve this effect by qualifying everything that is ex-post as
a fact whether it is directly observable or not. That means including the
participants' thinking among the facts. I believe that is a legitimate use
of the word, as the expression ex-post facto attests. We may not be able to
tell what people think but as long as it is ex-post facto, it is uniquely de­
termined: people cannot think anything different as of that moment.
That means that the distinction is not between the subjective and ob­
jective aspects of reality but between ex-ante and ex-post. Ex-ante there
is a range of possibilities that people can contemplate; ex-post there is
only one situation that has actually prevailed. Instead of a shoelace the­
ory of history which implies that the two sides that are connected are
somehow symmetrical, it would be better to speak of a "zip-lock the­
ory of historythe past is closed; the future is open. Needless to say
neither theory claims that history can ever be fully known. Calling
them theories is an exaggeration.
This way of looking at reality will be difficult to get used to be­
cause we have been conditioned to think differently We have learned
--- Page 43 ---
20 NEW INTRODUCTION
to distinguish between facts and statements, reality and ideas. Now we
are required to think of reality as incorporating ideas and facts as in­
cluding statements; yet to make sense of such a reality we still need to
draw a distinction between the facts and the statements that relate to
them. It is the dual role of thinking as both a fact and an interpretation
or a statement about, facts that causes the difficulties.
I speak from personal experience. In my earlier attempts at for­
mulating the concept of reflexivity I ended up with the version I am
now rejecting, namely a connection between the objective and sub­
jective aspects of reality. That is what led me to speak of the shoelace
theory of history. The zip-lock theory is meant to correct that distor­
tion by focusing on the temporal aspect, the difference between ex-
ante and ex-post. It should be pointed out that the zip-lock theory is
really just another way of saying that reality is path-dependent. Under
that name the idea is much more familiar. However, the specific
mechanism of path dependence, the reflexive feedback loop, is less
well recognized.
Understanding Reality
The zip-lock theory has important implications for our ability to
understand reality. Let s invoke Poppers model of scientific method.
The model works with universally valid generalizations of a hypo­
thetical character that can be tested by subjecting them to repeated
experiments. Since the generalizations are timeless, explanations and
predictions are symmetrical and reversible. This model is clearly not
applicable to reflexive situations because of the asymmetry between
ex-ante and ex-post. Experiments are not repeatable because even if
all the observable facts are identical, the prevailing views of the par­
ticipants are liable to be different when an experiment is repeated.
The very fact that an experiment has been conducted is liable to
change the perceptions of the participants. Yet, without testing, gen­
eralizations cannot be falsified. Moreover, generalizations cannot be
used reversibly to provide explanations and predictions because his­
tory is path-dependent: ex-post is uniquely determined; ex-ante the
range of possibilities is more open. Explaining ought to be easier
than predicting.
I am slipping into a negative frame of mind again. Instead of speci­
fying what cannot be done, I must explore what can be done. Situa­
--- Page 44 ---
New Introduction 21
tions can be explained because ex-post facto they are uniquely deter­
mined. There is also room for predictions as long as no claim is made
that the future is predetermined. The range of possibilities is bounded
by the present, which is uniquely determined, and the participants' de­
cisions, which, we know, are based on biased views. Instead of looking
for determinate equilibria surrounded by random walks, as economic
theory has done, it is this range of possibilities that needs to be ex­
plored. Most importantly the zip-lock theory of history holds open the
possibility of changing the world in which we live. Social alchemists
can succeed where the original alchemists failed. This possibility poses a
danger to scientific method, but it offers hope for mankind.
The divergence between thinking and reality has emerged as an
important factor in determining the course of events. The divergence
varies from time to time, person to person and case to case. In some sit­
uations it is so minimal that it can be disregarded altogether. That is the
case in humdrum, everyday situations like driving to work or shopping
at the supermarket. In other situations, the divergence takes on great
significance. Not only are the participants' views far removed from real­
ity, but they also manage to move reality further away from what it
would be in the absence of a divergence. For instance, President Bush,
by rejecting South Korean president Kim Dae Jungs sunshine policy,
precipitated a crisis with North Korea and led many South Koreans to
think that the United States is more of an aggressor than North Ko­
reawhich is even further removed from reality than President Bushs
statement about the "axis of evil."
We may therefore draw a distinction between humdrum and his­
toric events, depending on the impact that the participants' misconcep­
tions have on the course of events. In humdrum, everyday events the
effect is negligible; in historic events, the impact is significant enough
to alter the participants' perceptions. I call those misconceptions that
influence the course of history "'fertile fallacies.?,We can then assert that
fertile fallacies and other misconceptions provide the key to history.
Needless to say, this is a tautology: first we distinguish between hum­
drum and historic events according to the participants' misconceptions
and then we claim that those misconceptions are the source of historic
change. Nevertheless, the tautology is useful in directing our attention
to the role of misconceptions and fertile fallacies.
The new paradigm can be formulated in purely abstract terms by as­
serting that all human constructs are Jallible. The term <<constructsJ, includes
--- Page 45 ---
22 NEW INTRODUCTION
both thinking and reality: institutions as well as conceptual frameworks,
theories, and points of view The term "fallible'' refers to something more
than the possibility that our constructs may be flawed; it asserts that most
of our constructs are, in fact, flawed.
Reality is full of flawed constructs. The fact that a certain way of
thinking prevails does not mean that it is valid; the fact that an institution
exists does not mean that it is well constructed. That is what sets social
constructs like governments or religions apart from physical constructs
like bridges or automobiles. A badly designed car will not run while so­
cial institutions or ideologies can be badly flawed and still persist.
The new paradigm should protect us from what may be called the
"'fundamentalist fallacy5,: the argument that just because a construct has
proved flawed, its opposite is bound to be flawless. The fundamentalist
fallacy, combined with the efficient market hypothesis, has given rise to
market fundamentalism. Tb keep things in perspective, the same funda­
mentalist fallacy can be detected also in communism and among
antiglobalization activists.
Financial Markets as Laboratory
The trouble with this way of presenting the new paradigm is that it is
too abstract. That is why we must now turn to the financial markets for
a practical demonstration. The Alchemy of Finance explores a variety of
specific examples; here I want to focus on the role of flaws and miscon­
ceptions in general terms, but I use the financial markets to make the
discussion less abstract.
I contend that the application of the concept of equilibrium to the
financial markets is itself a misconception. It came about because of the
success of natural science. Economic theory sought to mimic Newton­
ian physics. It tried to establish universally valid generalizations about
the conditions of equilibrium, and to a large extent it succeeded. As
long as the analysis was confined to physical goods, no great distortion
was involved. Both the supply and demand curves could be taken as in­
dependently given, and the equilibrium was determined by the inter­
section of the two curves. The distortion became more pronounced
when credit was introduced into the analysis.
Credit cannot be treated as if it were merely a passive reflection of
the underlying fundamentals, since it also plays an active role in shaping
those fundamentals. This can be seen when we consider the relationship
--- Page 46 ---
New Introduction 23
between the act of lending and the value of the collateral. Banks base
their lending on the value of the collateral; but the act of lending can also
influence that value. When people are eager to borrow and the banks are
willing to lend, the value of the collateral rises in a self^reinforcing man­
ner and vice versa. Thus the act of lending activates a reflexive relation­
ship that is absent in pure exchange. This was particularly noticeable in
the great sovereign lending boom of the 1970s, which forms the subject
of Chapters 4 and 5.
In a pure exchange, equilibrium has a clearly defined meaning: it is
the price that clears the markets. When it is applied to financial mar­
kets, equilibrium becomes more like a theological concept: it is the
price * that ought to clear the markets if market prices did not have any
effect on the participantsJ attitudes and/or the fundamentals. But it is in
the nature of financial markets that they do have such effects. Conse­
quently financial markets often develop boom/bust sequences and
other far-from-equilibrium conditions.
Flaws and misconceptions play a crucial role in individual boom/
bust sequences. Usually they involve a failure to recognize that a rela­
tionship is reflexive. In the great sovereign lending boom of the
1970s, the mistake was not to recognize that the banks' willingness to
lend enhanced the various debt ratios by which the banks measured
the b or rowersJ creditworthiness. In the conglomerate boom the error
was the willingness of investors to put a high value on earnings
growth generated by acquisitions that reinforced the overvaluation of
conglomerates. The misconception in the recent technology boom
was even more egregious. Investors valued top-line revenue growth
disregarding that the business models could be sustained only as long
as companies could sell stock at inflated prices. In other far-from-
equilibrium situations the flaws take other forms. Reagans Imperial
Circle (Chapter 6) arose out of an internal contradiction between
monetarism and supply-side economics; mergermania (Chapter 8)
was facilitated by the tax deductibility of interest on corporate loans
and the hefty fees earned by the intermediaries.
In the absence of such flaws and misconceptions, market excesses
tend to correct themselves in short order; but when the so-called fun­
damentals are susceptible to such influences the self-correcting mecha­
nism of the markets is impaired and an initially seltreinfbrcing but
eventually self-defeating process is set in motion. Seltcorrecting mar­
kets are humdrum, everyday events; boom/bust sequences are historic
--- Page 47 ---
24 NEW INTRODUCTION
in the sense that neither the fundamentals nor the participants' percep­
tions remain the same as they were at inception. In these cases it makes
no sense to speak of equilibrium; that is what makes the expression
^far-from-equilibrium conditions" so apt.
In the absence of equilibrium, it is the task of the authorities to
prevent or correct market excesses. But they, too, are fallible. Although
they are supposed to be above the fray, they are also participants with
their own institutional interests and biases. The result is a reflexive in­
teraction between regulators and markets, a kind of cat and mouse
game, which occasionally deteriorates into a boom/bust sequence due
to the regulators* failure to prevent it from happening.
In the book I tried to develop a regulatory and credit cycle but it
fell short of a full-fledged theory. That is just as well. In retrospect I feel
I went too far in trying to impose a cyclical pattern on history. As we
have seen, the boom/bust pattern is only one of many possibilities.
There are other far-from-equilibrium situations; there are also long
stretches of humdrum, everyday events and seltcorrecting misconcep-
tions.The boom/bust pattern provides a very dramatic spectacle, and it
is easy to be impressed by it. I am guilty of making too much of it in
the book. Instead of interpreting history in terms of credit and regula­
tory cycles, I should have emphasized the role of flaws and misconcep­
tions as a key to understanding historical developments. That is what I
am doing now.
My starting point is that financial transactions do not take place in a
vacuum in accordance with timelessly valid laws; there are actual laws
and institutions at work that evolve over time and provide a historical
context within which the timelessly valid generalizations operate.
When we apply the timelessly valid concept of fallibility to this institu­
tional framework we arrive at the proposition that whatever regime or
arrangement prevails, it is bound to be flawed.
I have actually demonstrated that proposition in the book with re­
gard to currency markets, and events since then have reinforced my
thesis. Jokingly, I compare the exchange rate regimes to matrimonial
regimes: whatever regime prevails, its opposite appears more attractive.
Fixed exchange rates are too rigid, and freely floating exchange rates
lend themselves to long-lasting, self-validating trends that eventually
become unsustainable. We are currently (March 2003) at a point where
the strong dollar may have become unsustainable. Currency pegs were
discredited by the emerging markets crisis of 1997—1998, and for a time
--- Page 48 ---
New Introduction 2 5
it was believed that the answer was to be found at either extreme: a
currency board or a free float. This belief did not survive long; it was
put to rest by the Argentine default. Dirty floats remain out of favor, yet
I beheve it is the right prescription for Brazil.9 (Dirty float is a floating
exchange rate regime that includes ad hoc government intervention to
influence a currency s directions.)
It can be seen that whatever currency regime prevails, it is flawed.
The fact that a regime is flawed makes its opposite more attractive, but
that does not render its opposite flawless; the flaws will become appar­
ent when the opposite regime prevails. This sounds discouraging, but it
can also be interpreted in a positive way: there is infinite room for im­
provement. Since perfection is unattainable, future generations will not
be deprived of the opportunity to improve the world in which they
live. But there are no universally valid solutions; all improvements have
to be considered in the context of the prevaiEng arrangements. Re­
forms that may work in a particular context may be inappropriate at
another time. Those who claim to be in possession of timelessly valid
solutions are making a false claim. That is not to say that we cannot
make universally valid generalizations—the human uncertainty princi­
ple is such a generalization一only that such generalizations do not and
should not determine reality.
In my investment career I operated on the assumption that all in­
vestment theses are flawed. This proposition itself is flawed: it does not
follow from the human uncertainty principle that all theories are
flawed. But it is a very useful assumption to work with. The fact that a
thesis is flawed does not mean that we should not invest in it as long as
other people believe in it and there is a large group of people left to be
convinced. The point was made by John Maynard Keynes when he
compared the stock market to a beauty contest where the winner is not
the most beautiful contestant but the one whom the greatest number
of people consider beautiful. Where I have something significant to add
is in pointing out that it pays to look for the flaws; if we find them, we
are ahead of the game because we can limit our losses when the market
also discovers what we already know. It is when we are unaware of
what could go wrong that we have to worry.
It hardly needs stressing that this approach is in contradiction with
the efficient market hypothesis and the theory of rational expectations.
The latter claims that the markets are always right; my proposition is that
markets are almost always wrong but often they can vaEdate themselves.
--- Page 49 ---
26 NEW INTRODUCTION
As the real-time experiment demonstrates, this interpretation of how fi­
nancial markets operate can be much more profitable than the rational
expectations theory would permit.
Whether the approach works outside the financial markets is an­
other question. I contend that it works as far as understanding a situa­
tion is concerned. I have used it in understanding and anticipating
events connected with the collapse of the Soviet system and I can claim
some success.10 I am currently using it in interpreting the Bush doc­
trine.11 But when it comes to influencing the course of events a critical
mode of thinking may be more of a hindrance than help. People do not
like to hear when they are wrong, and they like to follow leaders who
can convince them that they know what they are doing. Those who
admit their mistakes or their doubts do not stay leaders very long. This
may be one reason why markets are more efficient than politics.
There is a difference between what is successful and what is true.
That is one of the great insights that the theory of reflexivity has to of­
fer and it applies both to the financial markets and politics. It is a lesson
that still needs to be learned. Our society worships success as if it com­
bined truth and virtue. This view, which is dominant in present-day
America, is false.
The Search for Second-Best Solutions
Where does this leave the study of social phenomena in general and
economic theory in particular? A strong case can be made that the slav­
ish imitation of natural science has led economic theory down the
wrong path. In their search for universally valid generalizations, econo­
mists largely ignored the complexities and uncertainties of the real
world and constructed an elegant axiomatic structure based on unreal­
istic assumptions. The assumptions underlying perfect competition in­
clude perfect information, homogeneous commodities, a large number
of participants engaged in profit-maximizing behavior, and no transac­
tion costs. The contention that unregulated financial markets lead to
the optimum allocation of resources rests on the assumption that par­
ticipants base their decisions on rational expectations. None of these as­
sumptions prevail in the real world.
The edifice that has been erected on these unsound foundations is
extremely fragile. General equilibrium prevails only under optimum
conditions when all the assumptions are met. Remove even a few of the
--- Page 50 ---
New Introduction 27
assumptions, and the edifice comes crashing down. It is not enough for
some of the participants to act on the basis of rational expectations; they
must all do so一otherwise it is irrational for any of them to do so. And if
the optimum is unattainable, it is not at all certain that unregulated mar­
kets ofier the second best solution. For instance, it might have been
good public policy to dampen the "irrational exuberance" of the infor­
mation technology boom by raising margin requirements; or it may be
preferable to increase the supply of public goods. Since the optimum is
ruled out by the principle of fallibility and only the second best is avail­
able, the prevailing paradigm is not only unrealistic but actually mislead­
ing because it is used to buttress market fundamentalist policies.
I am of course not advocating demolishing the edifice of economic
analysis. That would be another example of the fundamentalist fallacy:
just because the results are found wanting, the method that produced
them has to be abandoned. In fact, the same method that produced
equilibrium theory has also led to the questioning of that theory, and to
the exploration of alternative approaches. Critics of The Alchemy of Fi-
nance reproached me for not being up-to-date on recent developments
in economic theory, and their criticism was justified. While I still can­
not claim full familiarity with the literature, I see some merit in behav­
ioral economics and even more merit in evolutionary game theory. I
consider the latter a practical exploration of reflexivity.
Adaptive Behavior
A new paradigm seems to be gradually emerging. It consists of replac­
ing the assumption of rational behavior with the concept of adaptive
behavior. The two concepts are very different in character. Rational be­
havior is a postulate that lends itself to deductive logic and an axiomatic
system. Adaptive behavior is an empirical concept and it does not lead
to any a priori conclusions. It is what it is——a subject for exploration.
The exploration has led to evolutionary game theory and evolutionary
systems theory~both of which treat behavior as path-dependent and
not necessarily internally consistent. Both disciplines are capable of
producing determinate results. For instance, in repeated prisoners5
dilemma games tit for tat proves to be the best strategy. But not all re­
sults are determinate. For instance, in most predator-prey relationships
the outcome is constantly fluctuating, and only rarely is a stable equi­
librium reached.
--- Page 51 ---
28 NEW INTROOUCTION
Does that mean that a new paradigm has superceded the old one
and reflexivity has been recognized in fact although not in name? Not
quite. The old paradigm is far from abandoned. Indeed, it is more influ­
ential than ever when it comes to poEcy. And the new paradigm has
not yet produced a coherent and comprehensive explanation of social
phenomena. For instance, adaptive behavior is easier to reconcile with
the recent technology boom than rational behavior, but it does not
provide an adequate explanation of the course of events. What is miss­
ing is exactly a recognition of reflexivity and the consequent diver­
gence between outcomes and expectations.
Reflexivity goes beyond the concept of adaptive human behavior
and makes a claim about the situations in which adaptive humans par­
ticipate. The claim is that adaptive behavior helps create what may be
called, for lack of a better name, an "adaptive environment,and the
two are interconnected in a reflexive manner. This means that partici­
pants have to adapt to constantly changing situations and the process
will never be complete. The idea is implicit in the predator-prey rela­
tionship: one party is the other partys environment. Reflexivity makes
the idea explicit. If the claim is valid, the prevailing paradigm cannot be
valid: equilibrium may never be reached, because the attempt to reach
it moves the target.
The concept of adaptive behavior is equally applicable both to bi­
ology and to the social sciences. There is something reassuring about
that, because it blurs the sharp dividing line that I have drawn between
the natural and social sciences. Dichotomies are characteristic of our at­
tempts at understanding reality, not of reality itself It is reassuring to
have a bridge across the divide. Vet there must be a deficiency in the
concept of adaptive behavior because it fails to identify what is different
between biology and human affairs. That deficiency is corrected by in­
troducing the concept of reflexivity The divergence between outcomes
and expectations is specific to human behavior. While it may be appro­
priate to assign expectations and intentions to some animals, only in
the case of humans are we in a position to study them.
The mechanism through which adaptive behavior manifests itself is
difierent in biology and the social sciences. In biology it operates
through mutation and manifests itself in the propagation of particular
genes within the species. In human affairs flaws and misconceptions
play the same role as mutation does in biology but it is ideas and behav­
ior patterns that are being propagated, not genes. My success in the fi­
--- Page 52 ---
New Introduction 29
nancial markets will have no efiect on the gene pool of future hedge
fund managers, but the success of trend-following behavior in currency
markets can increase the crowd of trend-following speculators.
Behavioral economics and evolutionary game theory were far less
advanced when I wrote The Alchemy of Finance than they are today
These disciplines are potentially compatible with reflexivity, and I hope
they will make the concept more acceptable. Nevertheless I contend
that the concept of reflexivity is needed in order to establish a new par­
adigm. It is needed, first, to debunk the theory of rational expectations
and the efficient market hypothesis; second, to give the proper founda­
tions to behavioral economics and evolutionary game theory
It may be questioned whether we need a new paradigm. Why not let
a thousand flowers bloom? I am sympathetic to this point of view The
best response to fallibility is pluralism. The main merit of a market econ­
omy is not that it assures the optimum allocation of resources but that it
allows people to have a choice and to learn from their mistakes. But falli­
bility cannot be used to justify false theories. Reflexivity and rational ex­
pectations are incompatible, and we therefore do have to make a choice.
I trust that enough has been said to make the choice clear. Rational
expectations theory could prevail only under conditions so extreme as
to be unsuitable for human habitation. By contrast, the theory of re­
flexivity does not provide the rigorous results we have come to expect
from scientific theories, but it does fit the actual behavior of financial
markets much better. There ought to be no contest.
The Boom/Bust Model
What about the second part of a paradigm shift: the establishment of a
new paradigm? Let us see how my boom/bust model stands up to crit­
ical examination. Robert Solow criticized it for incorporating so many
escape clauses that it cannot possibly be falsified.12 He is both right and
wrong. He is right in the sense that the boom/bust model is not a falsi­
fiable theory. He is wrong in the sense that it was never proposed as a
falsifiable theory but rather as an illustration, a prototype of how reflex­
ivity works in financial markets. Reflexivity is a meta-theory a para­
digm, like the utility maximizing model of neoclassical economics;
neither is directly testable.
As a prototype, the boom/bust model is perhaps even more rele­
vant today than it was when originally published. We have just lived
--- Page 53 ---
30 NEW INTRODUCTION
through the biggest boom/bust cycle since World IL The cycle
bears a remarkable similarity to the conglomerate boom of the late
1960s on which the boom/bust model described in The Alchemy of Fi-
nance was based. It will be instructive to identify the similarities and
the diflerences.
The main similarity lies in a self-reinforcing process whereby inflated
stock prices can accelerate an underlying trend, which in turn enhances
expectations and inflates stock prices until the outcomes fail to sustain
expectations and there is a crash. In the conglomerate boom the process
had to do with using inflated stock for acquisitions. In the Internet and
telecom boom, inflated stock prices accelerated the introduction of new
technologies. In each case, there was a misconception involved. In the
conglomerate boom investors put the same value on per-share earnings
irrespective of how they were achieved; in the technology boom the er­
ror was more egregious: stocks were valued at a multiple of revenues, not
earnings, and growth was financed by selling stock, not by following
sound business plans. In each case the misconceptions were reinforced by
positive changes in the fundamentals: earnings and revenue growth accel­
erated. Expectations were inflated until they became unsustainable, but
before that happened the process had withstood some difficult tests.
Eventually a turning point was reached. In the conglomerate boom
it came when Sol Steinberg was unsuccessful in taking over Chemical
Bank. In the technology boom the critical event was the auctioning of
3G licenses in Europe. Telecom companies were obliged to make in­
flated bids in order to justify their inflated stock prices. Until then, in­
flated stock prices had been a source of cash; on that occasion they
turned into a cash drain. As stocks began to decline the trend became
self^reinfbrcing in the opposite direction. The excesses that could be
concealed while stock prices were rising started to surface. During the
boom, corporations had used every avenue at their disposal to boost
earnings, and when they ran out of legitimate devices, some corpora­
tions turned to illegitimate ones. When the market turned, some of
these illegitimate practices were exposed. The coup de grace was deliv­
ered when Enron went bust. Enron, like many companies, used special
purpose entities (SPEs) to keep debts off its balance sheets. But unlike
many other companies, it used its own stock to guarantee the debt of
its SPEs. When the price of Enron fell, the scheme unraveled, exposing
a number of other financial misdeeds the company had committed. The
Enron bankruptcy reinforced the downtrend in the stock market,
--- Page 54 ---
New Introduction 31
which led to further bankruptcies and news of further corporate and
individual misdeeds. Both the downtrend and the clamor for corrective
action gathered momentum in a self-reinfbrcing fashion― ust as the
boom/bust model envisions.
There was nothing surprising about this course of events. It has
happened many times before. The real surprise was that people were
surprised. After all, many of the practices that were subsequently con­
demned were carried on quite openly Everybody knew that the best
companies, such as General Electric and Cisco Systems, were massaging
their numbers to maintain the appearance of a steady progression of
earnings. Indeed, investors put a premium on managements ability to
do just that. SPEs could be bought off the shelf, and investment banks
maintained structured finance departments to provide custom-made
designs. The management of Tyco International Ltd. proudly pro­
claimed that they could generate earnings growth by acquiring compa­
nies and moving them to Bermuda where their earnings were tax
exempt, and Tyco was accorded a high earnings multiple. Stock options
were not only accepted but considered a useful device for boosting
shareholdersJ values since they provided executive compensation with­
out incurring any costs and encouraged management to focus on the
stock price above all other considerations. A similar change of attitudes
had occurred in the conglomerate boom/bust sequence. During the
boom phase investors idolized managements. After the bust, the presi­
dent of Ogden Corporation told me ruefully at lunch that have no
audience to play to."
The major difference between the two instances is a difierence in
the pervasiveness of the boom/bust process and in the extent of the
malfeasance involved. The conglomerate boom affected only a segment
of the stock market—the conglomerates and the companies they ac­
quired—and a segment of the investing public, spearheaded by the so-
called "go-go" funds. When the conglomerates began to threaten the
overall financial establishment, that establishment closed ranks against
them. By contrast, the recent boom encompassed the entire corporate
and investment community, and todays establishment, including the
poEtical establishment, was fully complicit. Enron, WorldCom, and
Arthur Andersen could not have gotten away with their nefarious ac­
tivities without encouragement and active reinforcement from virtually
all sectors of American society—their corporate peers, investment pro­
fessionals, poEticians, the media, and the public at large. Whereas the
--- Page 55 ---
32 NEW INTRODUCTION
conglomerate boom ended because of resistance from the establish­
ment, in this case the boom was allowed to run its course, and the
search for corrective measures started only after the collapse. Even after
the crash, a probusiness administration was trying to downplay the
damage. The head of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
Harvey Pitt, was so lax on enforcement that it fell to Eliot Spitzer, the
Attorney General of New York State, to investigate the malpractices of
New York investment bankers. Eventually Harvey Pitt had to resign.
Most of the misdeeds of the recent boom fall into two categories: a
decline in professional standards and a dramatic rise in conflicts of in­
terest. And both are really symptoms of the same broader phenomenon:
the glorification of financial gain irrespective of how it is achieved. The
professions—lawyers, accountants, auditors, security analysts, corporate
officers, and bankers—allowed the pursuit of profit to take precedence
over long-standing professional values. Security analysts promoted
stocks in order to gain investment-banking business; bankers, lawyers,
and auditors aided and abetted deceptive practices for the same reason.
Similarly conflicts of interest were ignored in the mad dash for profits.
While only a small number of people committed acts that actually
qualify as criminal, many more engaged in activities that in retrospect
appear dubious and misleading. They did so thanks to reassuring legal
opinions, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), and the
comforting knowledge that everybody else was doing the same. When
broad principles are minutely codified—as they are in GAAP—the
rules paradoxicaBy become easier to evade. A whole industry was born,
called structured finance, largely devoted to rule evasion. Once a finan­
cial innovation was successfully introduced it was eagerly imitated, and
the limits of the acceptable were progressively pushed out by aggressive
and unscrupulous practitioners. A process of natural selection was at
work: those who refused to be swayed were pushed to the sidelines;
those leading the process could not see the danger signs because they
were carried away by their own success and the reinforcement they re­
ceived from others. As the Financial Times reported, 4<They couldn't see
the iceberg because they were standing on top of it."" Underlying this
indiscriminate pursuit of financial success was a belief that the common
interest is best served by allowing people to pursue their narrow sei仁
interest—or market fundamentalism, for short.
Market fundamentalism is a false and dangerous ideology. It is false
on at least two counts. First, it profoundly misapprehends the way fi­
--- Page 56 ---
New Introduction 33
nancial markets operate. It assumes that markets tend toward an equi­
librium that assures the optimum allocation of resources. Second, by
equating private interests with the public interest, market fundamental­
ism endows the pursuit of self-interest with a moral quality The second
fallacy is even more dangerous than the first one. It accounts for the
widespread abuses that characterized the recent bust as compared to the
earlier one.
It can be seen that the boom/bust model has withstood the test
of time. The fact that people have been surprised by what happened
indicates that the model, far from belaboring the obvious, still has
some explanatory power. At the same time, it can also be seen that
the model emphasizes one aspect of reality, the cyclical, at the ex­
pense of another, the unique. The technology boom was more perva­
sive and the abuses more widespread than in the case of the
conglomerate boom. I attribute this unique feature to the spread of
market fundamentalism. The fact that the pursuit of success has taken
precedence over moral considerations is a source of instability. I have
explored the subject in greater depth in my book Open Society: Re-
forming Global Capitalism (PublicAfiairs, 2000).
Toward a New Paradigm
The fact remains that the boom/bust model does not qualify as a scien­
tific theory because it cannot be falsified. Reflexivity may or may not
give rise to a boom/bust sequence and the process may be aborted at
any time. Each case contains unique features. The model has some pre­
dictive power—for instance, a bust could never precede a boom, and
the magnitude of the bust tends to be proportionate to the boom that
preceded it—but it is minimal. The model can be used to predict prac­
tically anything, and if it turns out to be false the error can be ascribed
to the particular prophesy not to the model. It will be recalled that I
predicted imminent catastrophe in The Crisis of Global Capitalism: Open
Society Endangered (BBS/PublicAffairs, 1998).
Rational expectations theory cannot be directly falsified, either.
The postulated conditions are never met, and any deviation from the
expected results can be ascribed to extraneous shocks. Its main conclu­
sion, however, that it is impossible to consistently outperform the aver­
ages, has been falsified by many outstanding performers, including
me—and I was not even familiar with the theory These performance
--- Page 57 ---
34 NEW INTRODUCTION
records could not possibly be considered random walks; yet the theory
has not been abandoned.
As mentioned before, reflexivity is a meta-theory, a conceptual
framework. In considering its suitability to serve as a paradigm for the
financial markets and even more broadly for human affairs the lack of
falsifiability does matter. I am inclined to argue that it is inevitable, due
to the unpredictability of the subject matter, but I am on weak grounds
here. It may be that I have just not found the right methodology.
I am forced to conclude that the theory of reflexivity as it stands
today cannot serve as a new paradigm. It is a philosophical theory, not a
scientific one. It can, however, be combined with the new departures in
economic research that are compatible with it, such as behavioral eco­
nomics and evolutionary game theory. The recognition of reflexivity
may inspire other new appro aches. Together, they can form a new para­
digm: the theory of reflexivity undermines the old paradigm, while the
new disciplines help to build a new one.
There is also more to be found out about boom/bust and other far-
from-equilibrium conditions than I have done so far. Accepting that
each sequence is unique, there are more specific facts that could be ad­
duced with regard to each sequence. There are also more common fea­
tures that could be established by comparative studies. The theory of
reflexivity imposes certain limitations on what can be accomplished, but
I am very far from pushing against those limits. A closer study of
boom/bust processes could also produce some testable generalizations
similar to the tit-fbr-tat solution for repeated prisoners' dilemma games.
All this could be done, but not by me. I have taken the argument as
far as I could. Now that my attention has veered from the financial
markets to other pursuits I have neither the energy nor the interest to
take it any further, (I also lack the qualifications. I have never been
good at math. As a student, I started questioning the assumptions of
economic theory because I had difficulty practicing it.) I am putting
my faith in the emerging new disciplines I have already mentioned.
They seem to possess the methodology that the new paradigm needs:
nonlinear programming and empirical testing. The old paradigm relied
on solving equations; the new paradigm is likely to rely on running
scenarios on computers and experiments in real life.
Many professional economists do not feel the need for a new para­
digm. Fifteen years ago they could dismiss my attack on the old para­
digm on the grounds that I did not understand it; now they can claim
--- Page 58 ---
New Introduction 35
that reflexivity is already incorporated in the latest advances in eco­
nomic analysis. It is true that some progress has been made in that di­
rection, but it is mostly at the margin. More importantly, public
discourse is still dominated by the old paradigm, and that stands in the
way of some much-needed improvement in public policy. Recognizing
reflexivity could definitely improve public policy The management of
currencies would benefit from a greater willingness to modify the pre­
vailing regime when its deficiency becomes apparent; and a better un­
derstanding of the boom/bust process could help the authorities to
prevent it from getting out of hand.
At the same time, I have to admit that the boom/bust model as it
stands today is of limited use to market participants. It has not even al­
ways helped me to make money. For instance, I managed to lose money
in the technology boom by selling short Internet stocks too soon. How
to convert theory into practice is the next subject to be discussed.
SECRETS OF A SUCCESSFUL SPECULATOR
Theories about financial markets look at them from the perspective of
the outside observer. I should now like to change the perspective and
describe what it is like to be an active participant. This will not change
any of the conclusions I have reached so far because the theory of re­
flexivity was designed to illuminate the role of the active participant,
but it will shed some additional light on the subject.The book contains
a real-time experiment, a sequence of investment decisions recorded at
the time they were made. Here I shall go a step further and give a sub­
jective account of my decision-making process. In other words, I shall
try to reveal "the secret of my success." Needless to say, I leave behind
any pretense of scientific objectivity.
As a money manager I was emotionally engaged in managing my
fund. I managed it as if my existence depended on it, as indeed it did. I
relied on my instincts and intuition as well as my conceptual frame­
work to guide me through uncertainty. A number of factors conspired
to increase my dependence on emotions. For one thing, I had less
knowledge and information at my disposal than most other fund man­
agers. I had never studied security analysis, I was not part of a team, and
I was ready to engage in a much broader range of activities than most
others. I was not well positioned to perform better than others if I had
--- Page 59 ---
36 NEW IHTRODUCTION
tried to play the market by a particular set of rules; my competitive ad­
vantage lay in recognizing changes in the rules of the game. I started
with hypotheses relating to individual companies; with the passage of
time my interests veered increasingly toward macroeconomic themes.
This was due partly to the growth of the fund and partly to the grow­
ing instability of the macroeconomic environment. For instance, ex­
change rates were fixed until 1973; subsequently, they became a fertile
field for speculation.
Specializing in reflexive change put me under tremendous time
pressure. I had to familiarize myself with particular industries or coun­
tries at short notice, and having done so I did not have the luxury of
keeping up-to-date. I used to claim, only half jokingly, that it took me
48 hours to become an expert on any subject; if I spent any more time
on it my judgment would be clouded by the facts. Specialists often de­
velop a vested interest in their subject; the information they collect is
never enough for them. I was only interested in the information that
was sufficient to make a decision; the rest would merely confuse the is­
sues. I called it "going for the jugular?5
I also developed the practice of "'investing first and investigating
later." It worked very well because if an idea was appealing enough to
attract me on first hearing, it was likely to have the same effect on oth­
ers. on further investigation, I found it to be flawed I could always
turn around and Equidate my position with a profit provided I was not
the last one to hear it. If the idea checked out, I was better situated to
increase my position because I had already bought at a lower price or
sold short at a higher one.
The fact that I was managing a hedge fund also contributed to
my emotional engagement. The use of leverage adds an additional di­
mension of risk to an investment portfolio. A portfolio without lever­
age is flat, as its name indicates. It can get larger or smaller but it
cannot be subject to margin calls and disappear altogether. The use of
credit, whether on the long or the short side, makes a hedge fund
three-dimensional. The equity base can support more or less leverage,
and if the structure is not properly balanced it can collapse. This made
the uncertainty with which all fund managers have to contend existen­
tial. The very survival of the fund depended on me. At the same time,
my reward was directly tied to the performance of the fund.
I was well qualified to deal with existential uncertainty. If I had to
sum up my qualifications, I would use one word: survival. When I was
--- Page 60 ---
New Introduction 37
an adolescent, the Second World War gave me a lesson in survival that
I have never forgotten. I was fortunate enough to have a father who
was a grand master in the art of survival, having lived through the
Russian revolution as an escaped prisoner of war. Under his tutelage
the holocaust in Hungary served as an advanced course at a tender
age.14 I have no doubt that my experiences as an adolescent played a
major role in my subsequent success as a hedge fund manager. So did
my conceptual framework.
Those who want to belittle the theory of reflexivity deny that it
has had much, if anything, to do with my financial success. They at­
tribute my performance to an uncanny intuition, and they treat the
theory as the self-indulgence of a successful speculator. My biographer
quotes my son Robert as saying:
My father will sit down and give you theories to explain why he does
this or that. But I remember seeing it as a kid and thinking, Jesus Christ,
at least half of this is bullshit. I mean, you know the reason he changes his
position on the market or whatever is because his back starts killing him.
It has nothing to do with reason. He literally goes into a spasm, and its
this early warning sign.15
My son is right about the backache. I used to treat it as a warning
sign that something was wrong in the portfolio. It used to occur be­
fore I knew what was wrong, often even before the fund began to de­
cline in value. That is what made it so valuable as a signal. It would be
wrong, however, to dismiss the theory on that account, because it was
the theory that made me take the signal seriously. I knew that I did
not act on the basis of knowledge; I was acutely aware of uncertainty
and I was always on the lookout for mistakes. As I mentioned earlier,
it is when I did not know the flaws in my positions that I had to
worry. When I finally discovered what was wrong my backache usu­
ally went away.
The major insight I gained from the theory of reflexivity and what
I now call the human uncertainty principle is that all human constructs
(concepts, business plans or institutional arrangements) are flawed. The
flaws may be revealed only after the construct has come into existence.
That is the key to understanding reflexive processes. Recognizing the
flaws that are likely to appear when a hypothesis becomes reality puts
you ahead of the game.
--- Page 61 ---
38 NEW INTRODUCTION
The existential uncertainty the close connection to my own for­
tunes, and the three-dimensional structure of the fund made me treat it
as a living organism that was tied to me like a Siamese twin. This was
more than a figure of speech; it was intensely felt. The fund was drain­
ing me and feeding me at the same time. Conversely, I endowed the
fond with the attributes of a living organism.
The thinking in which a living organism engages is very different
from the kind of thinking envisioned by the theory of rational expecta­
tions. The latter is akin to the thinking of an outside observer. It involves
information processing with the assumed objective of maximizing self^
interest. The former involves emotions as well as reason. Indeed, emo­
tions often take precedence over reason because of the time element:
decisions often have to be taken in a hurry, and the less time there is to
weigh all the relevant considerations the greater the role of instincts and
primal emotions. Perhaps I did not make this point sufficiently clear
when I spoke of the cognitive function; it might be better to speak of
precognition, which is carried on in different parts of the brain and the
cortex than rational thought. Precognition predates the evolution of rea­
son. It is more like animal behavior. Indeed, descriptions of the financial
markets are full of animal imagery: bulls, bears, herd instinct. And scien­
tific theories have remarkably little traction among practitioners. That
does not mean that there is no room for reason. Reason and emotion
are intricately interwoven, and human behavior cannot be properly un­
derstood as wholly rational. I relied on reason more than most practi­
tioners and I prided myself on a conceptual framework that recognized
the role of emotions and the Emitations of reason.
The thinking of the active participant is very difierent from that of
the outside observer. We may call it "organic" as distinct from rational.
Scientists are interested in timeless generalizations and statistical proba­
bilities; participants need to focus on the one particular case in which
they are participating. Probabilities and generalizations can be useful,
but they are misleading if they are based on the viewpoint of the out­
side observer. That is what happened in economic theory
Classical economics allotted a purely passive role to the partici-
pants, thinking. That made it possible to postulate perfect knowledge,
which was, in turn, the foundation of perfect competition. The concept
has undergone an intricate evolution in which the assumption of per­
fect knowledge was replaced by the assumption of perfect information,
and it was supplemented by a so-called methodological convention,
--- Page 62 ---
New Introduction 39
which took the supply and demand curves as independently given. This
convention managed to exclude the reflexive feedback mechanism
whereby market prices can afiect those curves. More recently, devia­
tions from the equilibrium position have been attributed to asymmet­
ric information. It may seem as if the theoretical framework has been
gradually brought closer to reality; in fact, it has become ever further
removed from it because the active, participating function has not been
taken into account. By contrast, the theory of reflexivity takes the ac­
tive participants as its starting point. Therefore, it can provide them
with a useful conceptual framework, and I have used it in that capacity.
What it cannot do is to enable the participant to occupy the position of
a detached observer.
I have, in fact, tried to put myself into the position of an outside
observer and remain as detached as possible. I realize that it is impossi­
ble to rid oneself of emotions, yet it is important to keep ones emo­
tional state as stable as possible in order to have a solid platform from
which changes in the outside world can be evaluated. If the platform it­
self is responding to difierent emotions than the market, it becomes dif­
ficult to observe changes in the market. The task is easier if the
participant is moved by the same emotions. That is what I sought to
achieve by identifying myself with my fund. It should be recognized,
however, that the process involves something very different from ratio­
nal thought; it is better described as empathy The participant enters
into the mind of the market and tries to understand it from the inside. I
found the task easier than most other investors, partly because of my
conceptual framework and partly because I identified myself with my
hedge fund so intimately. I assumed that the market felt the same way as
I did, and by keeping myself detached from other personal feelings I
could sense changes in its mood. This was a hard discipline. It meant
subordinating my own emotions to those of the market. It made it di仁
ficult to maintain other emotional involvements. My family had good
reason to resent it. I looked on myself as an athlete or a boxer in train­
ing who had to sacrifice many other things for the sake of success.
Managing a hedge fund requires single-minded devotion. When I be­
came engaged in setting up a foundation network, I found that my
philanthropy did not mix well with managing a hedge fund. The trou­
ble was not only the amount of time it took but, even more, the con­
flicting emotional signals. It was confusing to feel good about
something I was doing in philanthropy when I ought to feel bad about
--- Page 63 ---
40 HEW INTRODUCTION
the way I was positioned in the market, or vice versa. I resolved the
conflict by giving up the active management of my fund. I ceased to be
a boxer in training and became the coach.
I should clarify what I meant when I said that I felt the same way
the market did. I was referring to the mood of the market, not to the
content of the hypotheses I formulated. On the contrary, I was acutely
aware that I was operating with a conceptual framework that was at
loggerheads with the prevailing wisdom. I made a conscious effort to
find investment theses that were at odds with the prevailing opinion
because that is where the best profit opportunities are to be found. I
defined my task as engaging in an arbitrage between my own judgment
and the prevailing view. Both my conceptual framework and my animal
instincts formed part of what I have called "organic thinking.^, When I
identified the makings of a self-reinforcing process, I could almost feel
my mouth water like one of Pavlov's dogs.
It is an interesting question whether I would still enjoy a competi­
tive advantage if I were an active participant. My conceptual framework
has become common knowledge. It used to be easy to write circles
around institutional investors, but they have become much more so­
phisticated; hedge funds have proliferated, and methods of risk control
have greatly improved. Nevertheless, I have a sneaking suspicion that I
would still be able to discover some flaws that can be exploited. For in­
stance, the prevailing methods of risk control are built on the old para­
digm, and they are bound to break down from time to time. But to take
advantage of the flaws I would have to learn how the risk control sys­
tems work. It would be like learning how to play against a chess ma­
chine: empathy would be less useful, and some knowledge of
mathematics―which is not my long suitwould probably be unavoid­
able. I had the luxury of ignoring rational expectations theory; I could
not ignore modern risk and performance management techniques even
if I consider them flawed. I would have to understand how they work
because, in contrast to rational expectations theory they do influence
investor behavior.
In my view, risk management techniques cannot account for the
element of genuine uncertainty introduced by the improved tech­
niques一although it is possible to make allowances for it by so-called
stress testing. But the past is an unreliable guide to the future. I used to
take a much more primitive, organic view of risk and uncertainty Two
days——one up day and one down daywere sufficient to tell me
--- Page 64 ---
New Introduction 41
whether my fund was well positioned. Usually this gave me timely no­
tice to make some adjustments. I was willing to risk only my gains, not
my capital. This gave the fund its own momentum: picking up speed
when the wind was behind us and trimming sails in stormy weather.
My favorite saying was: "He who runs away lives to fight another day”
I refused to be bound by the calendar in deciding what counts as profit
and what is principal. After a good run, I was willing to give back a
portion of the gains even if it pushed me into negative territory in a
new year. As a result, we had multiyear runs. I find it amusing that most
hedge funds today do not use these simple guidelines. With their help, I
managed~with one exception—to confine declines to within 20% of
the highest point reached by the fund, calculated on a daily basis. There
were no similar limitations on the upside.
Where I have doubts whether I would be able to perform as I used
to is in the currency markets, particularly in the euro. Currencies used
to be like lakes with a few rivers feeding into them; by going upriver it
used to be possible to anticipate the level of the lakes. Now the lakes
are interconnected, and there are just too many tributaries to consider
to be able to predict currency movements.
The symbiotic relationship between me and my fund gave rise to
some serious identity problems. When I first started managing the fund,
I identified with it completely. I came from the trading and sales side,
where I had made it a point of keeping myself scrupulously insulated
from my work. I had had some experience as a salesman before enter­
ing the securities business. After finishing college in England I joined as
management trainee a firm making and selling handbags, custom jew­
elry and fancy goods, and I ended up as a salesman. I developed a the­
ory of salesmanship based on the principle that one must not on any
account identify oneself with the merchandise one is selling. Selling is a
game where you score when you make a sale. If you allow your ego to
be involved, the customer can brush you off and you lose; but if you do
not identify yourself with your work you will be able to redouble your
efforts when you are rejected, and if you make a sale you come out the
winner. I carried this principle over into the securities business, so it
came as a great relief when I switched from the sell to the buy side and
I could finally identify myself with my merchandise.
I soon discovered that running a hedge fund is a deadly serious
game: once you identify with your portfolio, your survival is at stake.
That is what makes financial markets such a good laboratory for testing
--- Page 65 ---
42 NEW INTRODUCTION
your ideas: failing a test can be very painful; passing a test brings relief.
The objective evidence is reinforced by emotions. Short on knowl­
edge, I relied heavily on the pain mechanism. There was also a positive
side to it: the sense of mastery that comes with success. I remember a
moment in time when I stood back and looked at myself with awe: I
saw a perfectly honed machine. Whatever happened in the world—
economists call them exogenous shocks—I could immediately put
them into perspective and relate them to everything else. I was operat­
ing in a state of heightened awareness.
The fund performed well, but the bigger it grew the more
money I had to manage and the greater the pressures became. I re­
member an occasion when I urgently had to find some new bank
credit lines. I was walking along Leadenhall Street in the City of
London and I thought I was going to have a heart attack. It made me
realize that if I died I would be the loser, and the insight undermined
the identity of interests between me and my fund. I decided to pay
more attention to myself and less to the fund. I relaxed the reins.
Amazingly, the fund performed even better. Evidently I had been too
cautious and controlling, replacing one investment thesis with an­
other too soon. When I let the reins loose, the fund rose nearly four­
fold in the ^pace of two years. I was enjoying myself and the success
of the fond but the identity problem remained unresolved. I was
aware that the underlying position of the fund was gradually deteri­
orating because I was depleting my store of investment ideas; it was
only a matter of time before we would run into trouble. 4
Eventually the internal conflict came to a head. I posed myself the
question, who is more important: I or my fund? Am I the master of my
destiny or the slave of my own creation? I resolved the question in fa­
vor of myself: I won, but my fund lost—the only occasion when the
loss exceeded 20%; it was 22.9% in 1981, to be precise. I informed my
shareholders of the identity crisis, and many of them redeemed their
shares. The size of the fund was cut in half. I withdrew from active
management while I reflected on what I really cared about. Out of this
soul-searching came the Open Society Foundation and this book. To
engage in the real-time experiment I had to go back to active man­
agement of the fund. The experiment held my attention and the fund
exceeded its previous performance. I was well rewarded for writing
this book.
It can be seen that I care for my conceptual framework more than I
--- Page 66 ---
New Introduction 43
care about making money (That framework also includes the concept
of open society and the foundation network devoted to it, which I do
not discuss in detail here.) The fact is, I have a passionate interest in the
truth, but I do not care much for money; otherwise I would not give so
much of it away To be truthful, my interest in the truth takes prece­
dence over even my interest in humanity—it is through my philosophy
that I arrived at my philanthropy I am glad I did because my philan­
thropy rescued me from the isolation to which my pursuit of profit
consigned me. I am much happier identifying with my foundation net­
work than I ever was identifying with my hedge fund—but the pursuit
of truth takes precedence over both, as this admission demonstrates.
I note this as a fact, not as something I can explain. I could hazard a
guess, but that would take me too deeply into my personal history It is
not at all self-evident that the pursuit of truth should take precedence
over other considerations. My love of truth is something personal. I did
not sacrifice everything for its sake, as my adventures as a salesman at­
test, but I feel happy when I can indulge in it.
Taking my passionate interest in the truth as a starting point, I can
build a couple of interesting arguments on it. One will establish the
merits of financial markets as a laboratory for the pursuit of truth, and
the other will extoll the merits of philosophy.
Financial Markets as Laboratory
First, the financial markets offer an excellent laboratory for the pursuit
of truth. The reason is to be found not only in the quantitative and
public character of the data but even more in the emotional reality of
financial markets. This will come as a surprise to many who regard fi-
nancial markets as far removed from reaHty, but it is their concept of re­
ality that is far removed, not the financial markets. Playing the markets
is about as real as a game can get. There is, of course, a divergence be­
tween expectations and outcomes, but the outcome has an inexorable
quality about it. In most social situations——in politics and in personal
and business relations—it is possible to deceive oneself and others. In
the financial markets, the actual results do not leave much room for il­
lusions. The financial markets are very unkind to the ego: those who
have illusions about themselves have to pay a heavy price in the literal
sense. It turns out that a passionate interest in the truth is a good quali­
fication for financial success.
--- Page 67 ---
44 NEW INTRODUCTION
How does the actual course of events relate to the truth? The rela­
tionship is not as straightforward as it may appear at first sight. Deci­
sions have unintended consequences; so a successful outcome does not
assure that the initial decision was based on correct understanding. Fi­
nancial markets may reinforce illusions, after all; that is how boom/bust
processes are generated. But the process eventually becomes unsustain­
able and the moment of truth dawns. So the truth lies somewhere be­
neath the surface of reality as expressed in market prices, and financial
success serves as a rather unreliable indicator of true understanding.
This point is well made in Part Four: Evaluation.
Testing theories in the financial markets is a useful substitute for
scientific testing. The tests are not as reliable as scientific ones but at
least the participant has a powerful incentive not to deceive him- or
herself about the results because of the financial and emotional costs in­
volved. If I were deceiving myself in the real-time experiment, I could
not have performed as well as I did. Admittedly the 32-year perfor­
mance record of Quantum Fund cannot be attributed solely to my
conceptual framework, especially as I was not personally in charge over
the entire period; but the theory of reflexivity undoubtedly played
some part in it~~~how big a part I shall leave to those who are better
versed in regression analysis than I.
Once you leave the confines of scientific method you are in con­
stant danger of getting lost in a world of your own creation and leaving
reality far behind. It has happened before, in medieval theology and in
nineteenth-century German metaphysics. I have experienced it per­
sonally in my earlier philosophical endeavors. That is why testing your
ideas in the financial markets can be so useful: the markets provide a
merciless reality check. Again, I speak from personal experience. I used
to be able to write much better whenever I was actually engaged in
money management. Now that my moneymaking days are over, I
sorely miss the reality check that playing the markets used to impose.
The Case for Philosophy
I should like to end with an impassioned plea for reinstating philosophy
as the source of all knowledge and wisdom. Obviously I have a passion­
ate interest in the pursuit of truth; I have established it as a fact. Now I
want to make a case for it.
Philosophy has fallen out of favor. Without the constraints imposed
--- Page 68 ---
New Introduction 45
by scientific method, the philosophers of the nineteenth century lost
contact with the physical world and became immerged in the meta­
physics of their own creation. Encouraged by the success of natural sci­
ence, logical positivists launched a frontal attack on metaphysics. Logical
positivism did not survive long―Ludwig Wittgenstein himself aban­
doned the conclusions of his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus in favor of lan­
guage analysis—but old-fashioned philosophy that seeks to address real
problems as opposed to the problems of language never recovered from
the onslaught. Analytical philosophy; which has come to dominate the
philosophy departments, is a branch of knowledge, not the source of all
knowledge. That is not satisfactory Our knowledge is not so securely
based that we can afford to stop asking the eternal questions about the
relationship between thinking and reality, the meaning of meaning, and
so on, even if we cannot find satisfactory answers to them, or, more ex­
actly, even if the answers always raise new questions. We are fed up with
philosophy because the questions never end. But the questions are in­
herent in the human uncertainty principle. If the principle is valid, we
must never stop questioning. A critical mode of thinking is indispensable
to a better understanding of the world and also for making the world a
better place. It is the foundation of an open society.
I contend that the human uncertainty principle is a step forward in
understanding the human condition. It tells us that all human con­
structs are flawed, philosophy included. But that is not a valid reason for
abandoning philosophy; we must just learn to watch out that the never-
ending questions should not lead to answers that become ever more re­
moved from reality The theory of reflexivity is a philosophical theory,
not a scientific one. It should not be dismissed on that account, but it
should be held to the test of reality What better laboratory could we
find for it than the financial markets, which brook no excuses?
There was a famous discussion between Karl Popper and Ludwig
Wittgenstein in Cambridge, England, that became the subject of a pop­
ular book, (cid:0)ittgenstein^ Poker.16 Popper argued that philosophy ought to
address real problems, while Wittgenstein took the position that it can
address only problems of language. I am testifying on behalf of Popper.
--- Page 70 ---
Part One
THEORY
--- Page 72 ---
