25
AN END-OF-YEAR
TAX STRATEGY
S uppose you own a stock that has made a nice gain during the year,
but you are concerned about a substantial pullback near the end
ofthe year.Ofcourse,you are reluctant to sell your stock and take
your profit before January 1,because ofthe tax implications.You would
like to avoid having to pay tax on that nice profit when the next April
15 arrives.
The IRS regulations make it essentially impossible for you to install any
kind of cost-free hedge of your stock profit that would defer a tax pay-
ment into the next year.There is,however,a way to use options to pro-
vide some degree ofcost-free protection ofyour profit without creating
a taxable transaction. This chapter demonstrates a strategy that offers
some limited protection ofyour profit while postponing a tax payment
and staying within the IRS guidelines.
Tax Code Restrictions
Several options strategies are available to provide a complete,cost-free
hedge of your stock profit.Unfortunately,the IRS does not allow such
strategies to be employed for the purpose ofpostponing a tax payment.
The IRS refers to such disallowed hedges as constructive sales.There is
no need to dwell on the complicated definition of what constitutes a
constructive sale,because our concern here is in a useful strategy that is
allowed.
The IRS does permit the use of the married put strategy (see
Chapter 17,“Married Puts”) to protect profit in a stock. This strategy
191

has the drawback that it is not cost-free,and in factcan be quite expen-
sive in some circumstances.The married put strategy involves buying a
put option to protect the stock,which could result in a significant cost
for the desired protection of a large stock holding.A cost-free strategy
is preferable.
An ideal cost-free protection strategy is to sell a deep-in-the-money
call against your stock position, but the IRS interprets this as one of
the disallowed constructive sales. The IRS does permit selling an in-
the-money call,but restricts just how deep in-the-money you can go.
Those in-the-money calls that are allowed by the IRS are referred to as
qualified covered calls. The strategy presented here shows how to
achieve a reasonable level of profit protection by using qualified
covered calls.
Qualified Covered Calls
Because our interest is to defer taking profit in the stock until the next
year,it is assumed that any covered call will have an expiration date in
January or later. For our purposes, we follow the IRS guidelines for a
qualified covered call that is sold when there are at least 31 days before
it expires,but not more than 90 days until it expires.
The basic IRS rule is that you can only drop down to the first strike
price level below a certain specified stock price. The specified stock
price is the closing price of the stock on the day before the covered call
transaction is to be initiated, provided that the stock does not open
more than 10 percent higher on the day planned for the transaction.If
the stock does open more than 10 percent higher on the planned trans-
action day,you can only drop down to the first strike price level below
the opening stock price.
The IRS guidelines also stipulate that,for stocks whose specified price
is $150 or less,the strike price of the covered call cannot be more than
$10 in-the-money when the trade is initiated.For stocks whose speci-
fied price is $25 or less,there is an additional restriction,namely that
the strike price cannot be less than 85 percent of the specified stock
price.
192
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Basic Strategy
The goal here is to achieve a reasonable level of cost-free profit protec-
tion by selling a covered call that meets the IRS guidelines.
The benefit of selling a covered call is that the cash received serves to
offset a pullback in the stock price. By selling an in-the-money call,
more cash is received,which provides a bigger cushion in case the price
of your stock begins to fall before the new year arrives. To create the
largest cushion,you want to maximize the difference between the stock
price and the strike price of the qualified covered call.
The cash received from the sale of the call does not become a taxable
transaction until the option position is resolved by one ofthe following
events: (1) option expires, (2) option is exercised, or (3) option is
bought back to close the short position. Outcome 1 does not occur
before the January expiration date.As a practical matter, it is unlikely
that outcome 2 would happen until after January 1.There is no reason
for outcome 3 because the owner of the stock controls that decision.
The first step of the basic strategy is to sell 1 January call for every
100 shares of stock you own. Typically, it is most convenient to use a
January call so that an early resolution of the position can be made
soon after January 1.
The selection of the strike price must comply with the IRS guidelines
for a qualified covered call. On the day planned for selling the call,
check to make sure that the stock opened no more than 10 percent
higher than the previous day’s close.After this is verified,the acceptable
strike price for the covered call is the first one below the closing price of
the previous day.Ifthe stock did open more than 10 percent higher,the
acceptable strike price for the covered call is the first one below the
opening price of the stock.
The second step is to make sure that you are complying with the time
constraints for initiating the covered trade.Because we are considering
an end-of-year strategy, it is relatively easy to comply with the con-
straint of initiating the trade with no more than 90 days until expira-
tion of the January call.As a rough guide,this implies that the covered
call would be sold sometime after the October option’s expiration date.
To comply with the 31-day rule, the sale needs to take place no later
193
Chapter 25 An End-of-Year Tax Strategy

than the December date that is 31 days from the January option’s expi-
ration date.
Keep in mind that you are not required to initiate the trade on any
particular date, so long as you do not get within the 31 days until the
January options expire.If you planned to do the trade on a certain day
only to find that the stock price is unfavorable on that day,wait until a
better opportunity presents itself.
Ifforsomereasonyouweretodecidetoinitiatethiscoveredcallstrategy
with less than 31 days until the January option’s expiration date, you
mustconsidersellingacallthathasaFebruaryorlaterexpirationdate.
Suppose that you have succeeded in initiatingthe covered call strategy.
Let’s examine the more likely outcomes.If the stock price is above the
strike price at the January option’s expiration date, your stock will
be called away and sold at the strike price of the option. The sum of
thecash received from selling the call option plus the proceeds from the
stock sale at the strike price will usually exceed the price of the stock at
the time you initiated the option trade. Of course, these transactions
will have tax consequences for profit earned in the year that the stock is
sold.
In some circumstances, you may decide to buy back the covered call
after January 1, to be able to continue holding the stock without any
concern that it might be called away from you. This may or may not
be a wise investment decision, but it will nevertheless delay the tax
consequences.
Ifthe stock price has fallen below the strike price at expiration,you may
still receive a return that exceeds the price of the stock at the time you
initiated the options trade.Furthermore,if the stock price is below the
strike price at expiration,the option will not be exercised and you can
continue to hold your stock if that seems to be a desirable choice.
To illustrate the basic strategy,here are some examples:
■ Example 1.You paid $3,300 to buy 100 shares of XYZ at $33 in
August.In early December,XYZ is at $68.You would like to sell
the stock to collect more than 100 percent profit,but you
arereluctant to create such a substantial taxable event in the
194
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

current year.Let’s employ the covered call strategy described
above:
Suppose the stock closes at $68 on December 5 and opens at
$69 on December 6.The stock price opened less than 10 per-
cent above the previous day’s close,so $68 is the price that
determines the strike price for the qualified covered call.
Because it is more than 31 days before the January option’s
expiration date,the Jan 65 call can be sold without incurring
acurrent year tax consequence on your stock profit.
Suppose that on December 6 you sell one Jan 65 call for $7 per
share.This brings $700 into your brokerage account with no
tax implications until the option is resolved.You have now
established some protection of your profit in XYZ stock.
Note that this call option has $3 of time value included in its
price [(65 + 7) – 69 = 3],which makes it highly unlikely that
itwould be exercised against you before that time value
disappears.
If XYZ is above $65 at the January option’s expiration date,
your stock will be called away and sold for $65 per share,which
brings another $6,500 into your brokerage account.Then you
will have received a total of $7,200 [700 + 6,500 = 7,200],
which represents a profit of $3,800 [7,200 – 3,400 = 3,800].
Note that this profit exceeds that which would have been
received from selling the stock at $69.For tax purposes this
profit is generated in the new year.
The break-even price for this covered call position is $62.If
XYZ is at $62 at the January expiration,the short option
expires worthless and the stock could be sold for $62 per share.
Then you will have received a total of $6,900 [700 + 6200 =
6,900],which is exactly what you would have received if the
stock had been sold at $69 on December 6.Earning the profit
of $3,500 [6,900 – 3,400 = 3,500] would be a taxable transac-
tion in the new year.
Note that if the price of XYZ is below $65 at the January
option’s expiration,it is not necessary that the stock be sold,
195
Chapter 25 An End-of-Year Tax Strategy

which would avoid any tax on the gain in stock value.The $700
profit received from selling the Jan 65 call would be a taxable
transaction in the new year.
■ Example 2.Assume that the scenario is the same as Example 1,
except that XYZ opens at $72 on December 6.This is still less
than a 10 percent gain over the previous day’s closing price,so
the Jan 65 call is again the qualified covered call.The Jan 65 call
might be sold for $8 or more per share,for an even greater
cushion than in Example 1.
■ Example 3.Assume that the scenario is the same as Example 1,
except that XYZ opens at $75.50 on December 6.This is an 11
percent gain over the previous day’s close.By the IRS rules,this
raises the allowed strike level to the Jan 75 call.This is not the
best opportunity to employ the covered call strategy,because
the Jan 75 call might be priced at only about $1.50 per share,
which does not provide much downside protection.
Follow-Up Variations
1. At any time before your stock is called away,you can elect to
keep your stock by buying back the short call option.Of
course,this could be costly if the stock price has risen signif-
icantly since you sold the option.Do not let greed overpower
good judgment by deciding not to give up the stock for a
price that was originally acceptable to you.
On the other hand,if the stock price has gone down,you can
buy back the short call for less than it was sold and make a
profit on the option,while you continue to hold the stock
for future gains.In this situation,avoid buying back the
option before January,because the profit on the option
transactions would be treated as a taxable gain in the
currentyear.
2. In January,you might decide to “roll out”of the short call
option and replace it with one that has a later expiration
date.This postpones the need to give up your stock.Suppose
the stock price has risen slightly and you decide that you
196
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

want to keep your stock.Then,buy back the January call
option at a small loss and complete the rollout by selling
another option from a later month with a strike price above
the level of the current stock price.Your objective in this
rollout maneuver is to bring in enough cash from selling the
new option to offset the loss incurred from buying back the
January option.
Comments
When looking for a favorable set up to employ this covered call strategy,
watch for those days in which the stock closes with a price that is just
below a strike. If the stock then opens higher the next day (but not
more than 10 percent higher),this allows you to capture a large intrin-
sic value from the sale of the option in addition to its time value.This
approach will provide the greatest protective cushion in case the stock
price does begin to fall (see Example 2).
Make sure that the covered call has some time value included in its
price. This guards against an early exercise that would require you to
sell your stock before January 1.
It should be noted that after the trade is initiated,the maximum return
from the stock has been capped.Further increases in the stock price will
not provide any more profit.
Consult your professional tax adviser before
implementing thestrategy described here to determine
its suitability for your individual circumstances.
197
Chapter 25 An End-of-Year Tax Strategy

This page intentionally left blank