2
OPTION SELECTION
What Is a Cheap Option?
E ach ofus has our own idea about when something is cheap.On a
superficial level,something that costs $1 is cheap,and something
that costs $100 is expensive.But it is not really the dollar cost that
makes something cheap or expensive.Rather,it is whether the intrinsic
value of the item purchased is close to the cost paid to own that item.
Often, we are tempted to buy something at a price which has been
“hyped” way beyond its intrinsic value. Remember the Beanie Baby
craze of a few years ago, when those cute little stuffed animals were
being hyped as collector’s items and as such were being bought for way
more than their intrinsic value? Now that the craze has passed, these
items are being sold at garage sales for a price that is much closer to
their intrinsic value.The hype value ofthe Beanie Baby has disappeared
over time.
What does this have to do with options? Well,every option has a price
that represents its intrinsic value plus a hyped value.In the language of
option traders,the hyped value ofthe option is called its time value.We
are all familiar with the cliché “time is money,” and never was this
expression truer than as it applies to the price ofan option.Options are
time-limited financial instruments, and it makes sense that an option
with a life of five months should cost more than an option with only
one month of life. With any option, you do not want to pay for too
much time value.One situation that warrants caution is when a stock is
generating lots of excitement (good or bad), because the price of its
options will be hyped up with extra time value.
Whenever you consider buying an option,it is a good idea to identify
just how much of its price is intrinsic value and how much is time
17

value. It is easy to compute its intrinsic value by asking this question:
What would this option be worth if it expired immediately today?
When that intrinsic value is deducted from the full option price, the
remainder is the time value.
Let’s look at a couple of examples:
■ Example 1.In mid-November,XYZ stock is at $89.The
December 85 call gives you the right to purchase 100 shares of
XYZ stock at $85 per share at anytime before this option
expires in about four weeks.The asking price forthis call is
$4.50 per share.How much of this price is intrinsic value and
how much is time value?
If this option were to expire as you are looking at it,you could
exercise your right to buy XYZ at $85 and then sell it at the cur-
rent market price of $89 for a profit of $4.So,the December 85
call has an intrinsic value of $4 per share.The rest of the price
of the option is its time value,which in this example is $.50 per
share [4.50 – 4.00 =.50].
Compare the December 85 call priced at $4.50 per share with
the April 85 call priced at $7.50 per share.The intrinsic value is
still $4,but for the April option,the time value has increased to
$3.50 per share [7.5 – 4.0 =3.5].This illustrates that “time is
money”because you will have to pay $3.50 per share to control
this stock for five months as compared with $.50 per share to
control it for four weeks.
■ Example 2.Again,XYZ is at $89 in mid-November.The
December 90 call is priced at $1.50 per share.How much of
this price is intrinsic value and how much is time value?
If this option were to expire as you are looking at it,it would be
worthless.The right to buy XYZ for $90 per share is worthless
when the stock can be bought in the open market for $89 per
share.So,the December 90 call has an intrinsic value of $0.The
rest of the price of the option is time value,which in this case is
the total price of $1.50.If XYZ does not go up during the four
weeks before the December 90 call expires,the value of this
option will shrink to $0.
18
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Now,let’s get back to the original question:What is a cheap option? The
XYZ December 85 call is $4.50 per share,while the December 90 call is
only $1.50 per share.Is the December 90 call really cheaper? If we just
consider time value,the December 90 call is three times more expensive
than the December 85 call ($1.50 versus $.50). Of course, if XYZ is
going to $95 before the December expiration in four weeks, you will
have a much larger percentage profit if you bought the December 90
call.But suppose XYZ only edges up to $91 at the December expiration.
The December 90 call would be worth $1 and you would have a loss of
$.50 per share [1.00 – 1.50 =–.50].Compare that with the December 85
call,which would be worth $6,and you would have a profit of$1.50 per
share [6.00 – 4.50 = 1.50].
Now let’s ask the same question—What is a cheap option?—in a differ-
ent context.The XYZ April 85 call is $7.50 per share,while the December
85 call is only $4.50 per share.Is the December 85 call really cheaper?
Although the time value of the April 85 call is much more than the
December 85 call ($3.50 versus $.50),keep in mind that the April option
has four extra months of life after the December option expires. It
might seem expensive to buy that extra time value,but you are paying
for a much longer window of opportunity to be right about a signifi-
cant rise in XYZ stock.Ofcourse,ifyour timing is impeccable and XYZ
makes a run within the next four weeks,the December 85 call will yield
a larger percentage profit than the April 85 call.But suppose XYZ goes
nowhere before the December expiration,and then in January starts a
leisurely climb to $95 by mid-March.In this scenario,the December 85
call expires with a loss of $.50 per share, whereas in mid-March with
XYZ at $95,the April 85 call could easily be worth $11 per share for a
profit of $3.50 per share [11.00 – 7.50 =3.50].
The objective of this discussion is to start you thinking about intrinsic
value and time value when you look at an option price.When you buy
an option, you are almost always going to be paying for some time
value—it is the nature of the beast.Just remember that for your option
to make a profit, the stock price must move enough to overcome the
loss of some if not all of that time value. The preceding examples
demonstrate that the option with the lowest price is not always the best
bargain.
19
Chapter 2 Option Selection

Let’s continue with the thought process that you should develop in
selecting a particular call option or put option to buy.We will assume
that you have identified a stock, which you think is going to make a
move in price (either up or down). To play this expected move in the
stock price,you decide to use options to achieve more leverage for prof-
it.Now you need to determine which option is going to work best.
To select the best option,you need to examine various choices to arrive
at a proper decision.In the following illustrations,we focus on the case
in which the stock price is expected to go up and hence we want to buy
a call option.At the end,you learn how a similar analysis can be applied
to the case ofbuying a put when the stock price is expected to go down.
In the context ofbuying a call,three example choices are presented.For
each example,we follow several scenarios to see whether the outcome is
compatible with our expectations. The three examples do not cover
every possible situation, but they should provide enough illustration
for youto begin developing your own skills at analyzing outcomes.
Selecting a Call
When you buy a call option on a stock, you are taking the view that
thestock is going to rise in price.You buy a call option instead of buy-
ing the stock to give yourself more leverage for a greater profit. If the
stock goes up by 15 percent,your option might easily increase in value
by 100 percent or even more.
After you have decided what stock you want to play for a gain,you need
to select an appropriate call option to buy. This is not as simple as it
might seem. You will have many possibilities from which to make a
choice.There will be several expiration months to consider,including the
current month and other months that possibly go out as far as twoyears
into the future. You will also have various strike prices to consider,
including ones below the stock price (in-the-money),near the stock price
(at-the-money),and above the stock price (out-of-the-money).
Which option is best? To answer this question, you must decide what
you believe will be the manner in which XYZ makes its upward move.
Is this a stock that is going to jump up 15 percent in the next two weeks
due to a much better than expected earnings announcement? Or,is this
20
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

a stock that will slowly rise by 25 percent over the next year? As you
review various choices ofcall options,think about how much the stock
must rise and the time frame during which that rise must occur to pro-
duce a profit.Also, if the stock does not make the expected move up,
check to see when you can exit the trade to minimize your loss.
General approach: When you consider buying a particular call option,
first determine what portion ofits total price is time value.Keep in mind
that this time value will ultimately be lost as the option expiration date
arrives.Then ask yourself,“Can the stock price rise high enough and fast
enough to increase the value ofthis option by an amount that will offset
the loss of its time value and provide an acceptable profit?”If you can
answer yes to that question,you have a good reason to buy the option.
Let’s look at some examples to illustrate this general approach.Some of
the prices used in these examples have been estimated by using an
options pricing calculator.
You think that XYZ is going to rise in price in the near to intermediate
future.In early April,XYZ is at $67.
■ Example 3.You considerbuying the Apr 70 call,which is priced
at $1.50 per share.This option seems cheap enough,but is it a
good one to buy? To answer this question,let’s see what XYZ
needs to do for this option to provide a reasonable profit.
The Apr 70 call expires in a little more than two weeks.Because
this option is out-of-the-money,all ofits $1.50 price is time value.
If XYZ rockets up to $73 in one week,the option might become
worth $3.70 ($3 intrinsic value and $.70 time value).This rep-
resents a nice $2.20 profit on a $1.50 investment,but it
required a 9percent gain in the stock price in one week.
If XYZ only manages to rise gradually over the next two weeks
to reach $71.50 just at expiration,the option will be worth
$1.50 (all intrinsic value and no time value at expiration).In
this scenario,XYZ has gone up by 7 percent in three weeks,but
you only break even on the option trade.
Suppose XYZ barely edges up to $68.50 with one week remain-
ing.Then,this option might be worth only $1 (all time value),
21
Chapter 2 Option Selection

because it is still out-of-the-money and has only one week of
life remaining.Now you have lost $.50 per share on the option
even though the stock has moved up slightly,and there is
almost no time left to recover.
Summary:This April option is cheap,but to make a nice profit,
the stock needs to make a significant rise soon after the trade is
initiated.This is not a likely scenario,which makes this trade
quite risky.
■ Example 4.You consider buying the May 65 call,which is
priced at $4.20 per share.This option seems much more expen-
sive than the Apr 70 call,but is that really true? Let’s see what
XYZ needs to do for this option to provide a reasonable profit.
The May 65 call expires in seven weeks.Because this option is
in-the-money,it has an intrinsic value of $2 [67 – 65 =2].
Therefore,its time value is $2.20 [4.2 – 2.0 =2.2].In comparison
with Example 1,we are paying for an extra $.70 of time value
[2.2 – 1.5 =.7],but we have considerably more time for this
option to return a reasonable profit.
If XYZ is able to make the 9 percent gain to $73 in five to six
weeks,this option might be worth $8.60 ($8 intrinsic value and
$.60 time value).This represents a nice profit of$4.40 on a $4.20
investment.Although the percentage profit on this option
tradeis not quite as good as compared with Example 1,the
May option has allowed more time for the stock to achieve its
rise to $73.
Suppose that XYZ does nothing for six weeks and then finally
manages to move up to $71.50 in the seventh week just as expi-
ration is reached.In this scenario,the option will be worth $6.50
(all intrinsic value and no time value at expiration).Here you
have made a profit of $2.30 per share [6.5 – 4.2 =2.3].Compare
this with Example 1,in which XYZ reached $71.50 at expira-
tion and produced no profit.
If XYZ is at $69.20 at the May options expiration,the May 65
call will be worth $4.20 [69.2 – 65 =4.2] for break-even.
22
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Summary:Although this May option may seem expensive,it has
some important advantages.By having a later expiration date,it
gives the stock more time to make the desired move.By having a
strike price that is in-the-money,the break-even point at expira-
tion is lower.
■ Example 5.You consider buying the Oct 65 call,which is priced
at $8.30 per share.This option costs almost twice as much as
the May 65 call in Example 4,but keep in mind that you are
buying a lot more time.Let’s see what XYZ needs to do to for
this option to provide a reasonable profit.
The Oct 65 call expires in 27 weeks.Because this option has the
same strike price of $65 as that of Example 2,its intrinsic value
is the same $2 [67 – 65 = 2].But this option has a time value of
$6.30 [8.3 – 2.0 = 6.3].In comparison with Example 2,we are
paying for an extra $4.10 worth of time value [6.3 – 2.2 = 4.1],
but we have an extra 20 weeks beyond the May expiration for
this option to perform.
If XYZ is able to make a 9 percent gain to $73 in 18 weeks
(about mid-August),this option might be worth $11 ($8
intrinsic value and $3 time value).This represents a profit of
$2.70 on an $8.30 investment.Although the percentage profit
on this option trade is not as good as compared with Examples
1 or 2,the October option has allowed considerably more time
than either the April or May options to achieve its rise to $73.
Suppose that XYZ is able to make a 20 percent gain to $80 as
the option nears expiration in October.Then the option will be
worth $15 (all intrinsic value and no time value at expiration),
and you will have made a profit of $6.70 on an $8.30 investment
for an 81 percent gain.In this scenario,we have allowed almost
seven months to achieve the 20 percent rise in XYZ.Such a rise
would be much less likely in the shorter time spans described
in Examples 1 or 2.
If XYZ is only at $70 in mid-September,this trade should be
close to a break-even situation.At that time,you will have been
able to follow the progress of XYZ for about 22 weeks.If the
23
Chapter 2 Option Selection

stock does not seem to be performing as expected,you could
exit the trade without a loss.
Summary:This October option is the most expensive because it
goes out the furthest in time and its strike price is in-the-
money.The big advantage of this option is that it allows lots of
time for the expected move in the price of XYZ to happen.
Overall Evaluation
Depending on the price action in XYZ stock,any of the Examples 3,4,
or 5 might produce the best profit.
Example 3 requires that you have impeccable timing about the move up
in stock price.This super-aggressive trade is only going to pay offunder
special circumstances.
Example 4 illustrates the advantage ofselecting an in-the-money option
and allowing a little more time to be right about the stock price move-
ment.This is a less-aggressive approach.If XYZ is a fairly volatile stock
that cycles through a 10 percent to 15 percent move every few months,
this could be the best choice.
Example 5 lends itself to a longer-term move up in the price of XYZ.
This trade works best for a stock that is less volatile and more likely to
show a steady upward growth over an extended time period.If LEAPS
options are available,they would be a more-expensive choice that could
extend the time frame out for two years.
Selecting a Put
When you buya put option on a stock,you are taking the view that the
stock is going to fall in price.You buy a put option instead of shorting
the stock to give yourself more leverage for a greater profit.
The preceding examples illustrating the thought process in selecting
a call option carry over to analogous examples for selecting a put.
Different strike prices would be used for the corresponding puts,
because an out-of-the-money put means the strike price is below the
24
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

stock price, whereas an in-the-money put means the strike price is
above the stock price.
Example 3 could be based on an Apr 65 put with similar option prices
and profits resulting from analogous stock price movement down
rather than up.
Examples 4 and 5 could be based on a May 70 put and Oct 70 put,
respectively.Again,similar option prices and profits would follow from
analogous stock price movement down ratherthan up.
25
Chapter 2 Option Selection

This page intentionally left blank