3
ENTERING AND
EXITING OPTION
TRADES
Often, the success of an options trade is strongly influenced by
how carefully the entry and exit prices are negotiated.The gain
or loss of $.10 per share in a stock trade is usually insignificant,
whereas in an option trade it can make a huge difference.Suppose that
you buy an option for $2 per share and later sell it for $3 per share.The
profit of $1 per share represents a nice 50 percent return on your
investment.If you could have shaved your entry price by $.10 to $1.90
and managed to pad your exit price by $.10 to $3.10, your profit of
$1.20 per share represents a dramatically improved 63 percent return.
The point here is that,in options trading,it is very worthwhile for you
to work at achieving good entry and exit prices.Saving an extra $.10 on
either the entry price or the exit price of a trade is usually enough to
cover the brokerage fees on both ends of the trade.
To begin,let’s review the basics of how options prices are maintained.
Nowadays, with the decimal pricing of stocks, the price of a stock is
shown down to $.01 changes.The situation with options is much dif-
ferent. Options that cost less than $3 per share can change price in
increments of $.05, but no smaller. Options that cost $3 per share or
more can change price in increments of $.10,but no smaller.
Each option exchange will list a bid price (called the bid) and an ask
price (called the ask) for every option that is available on a stock or
27

index listed with that exchange. The bid is the highest per-share price
that some trader (or market maker) is willing to pay to buy the option.
The ask is the lowest per-share price that some trader (or market
maker) is willing to accept for the purchase ofan option.Most financial
data feed services that provide options prices show only the best bid
and best ask prices as selected from a survey of all the exchanges.
The ask is always greater than the bid,and the difference between these
is called the bid/ask spread,or more simply the spread.Depending on
the liquidity of the option, the spread may be as narrow as $.05 for
options trading under $3 or as wide as $1 or more for some high-
priced, illiquid options.Whenever the spread is wide enough, there is
the possibility of negotiating a more favorable price somewhere
between the bid and the ask.
The width of the spread for an option is essentially controlled by the
market maker.He earns his living by managing an appropriate spread.
His goal is to have someone buy an option from him at the ask,while
someone else is willing to sell him the same option at the bid.The two
option positions cancel each other, and the market maker pockets a
profit equal to the value ofthe spread.This may seem like a small prof-
it ifthe spread is only $.05 to $.10,but when repeated over a large num-
ber of contracts,it soon becomes quite substantial.
In a nonvolatile situation in which there is a high-volume demand for
both buying and selling an option,the market maker is content with a
narrow spread,because it is easy to match up his long and short posi-
tions while repeatedly collecting the value of the spread. In a highly
volatile situation in which a large but unbalanced demand for an
option exists, or in a low-volume situation, the market maker main-
tains a wide spread. In those situations, it is more difficult to find a
matching trade,and the market maker wants a bigger spread to offset
his risk.
Now let’s turn our attention to the details of entering and exiting a
trade.For simplicity,we confine our attention to the opening and clos-
ing of a long option position.That is,first buy an option in an “open-
ing transaction” and then later sell the option in a “closing
transaction.”
28
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Entering a Trade
There are two main ways to initiate an “opening transaction” for an
option. Similar to buying stock, the purchase of an option can be
accomplished by means of either (1) a market order or (2) a limit
order.
My recommendation is to never use a market order in an opening
transaction.The best that you can do is to be filled at the ask price,and
quite often you will do worse.If your order is for several contracts,you
may find that only a few are filled at the ask before the price slides to a
higher level for the remaining fills.
In a fast market where option prices are changing quickly, you may
believe that you will only succeed in entering the trade by the use of a
market order. In such a situation, you will be placing yourself at the
mercy ofthe market maker,who is allowed considerable latitude in fill-
ing market orders during fast conditions.
So this leaves us with only the limit order as the principal way to initi-
ate an option trade.With the limit order,you select the price that you
believe is reasonable to pay for the option and enter that price with the
order.There is no guarantee that your order will be filled,but if it is,it
must be at your price or lower.Let’s look at some examples to illustrate
how to determine an appropriate price for a limit order to enter a
trade:
■ Example 1A.Bid =$2.40 and ask =$2.45.There is no room for
negotiation here.The spread =$.05,which is the minimum
possible for an option trading under $3 per share.Typically,the
spread is this tight only for highly liquid options such as those
associated with the NASDAQ 100 Trust (QQQQ).Place a limit
order to buy at $2.45 and you should get a quick fill.
■ Example 2A.Bid =$2.40 and ask =$2.80.With the spread =
$.40,there is some room for negotiation.You could try to split
the spread in the middle with a limit order to buy at $2.60.
Getting filled at that price under slow conditions could be diffi-
cult.If you move the limit price up to $2.65 or $2.70,you are
much more likely to get filled.
29
Chapter 3 Entering and Exiting Option Trades

■ Example 3A.Bid =$4.10 and ask =$4.40.Because the option is
trading over $3 per share,the minimum spread would be $.10.
Here the spread is $.30,which suggests that there may be some
room for negotiation.You cannot split the difference at $4.15
because an option over $3.00 must be priced in $.10 incre-
ments.Typically,a limit order to buy at $4.20 is pointless,
because you are asking the market maker to give up more than
half the spread.A more realistic approach is to place a limit
order at $4.30.This gives the market maker a $.20 spread,
which should be enough to get the trade filled.
■ Example 4A.Bid =$8.50 and ask =$9.10.With the spread =
$.60,this is what you might see for a deep-in-the-money
option that has no open interest.The market maker is not
really interested in trading this option,but if you insist,he is
going to make it worthwhile for himself.In this type of
situation,be prepared to struggle to get a decent fill price.
Exiting a Trade
As it is with entering a trade,you can exit an option trade in a closing
transaction by means of either (1) a market order or (2) a limit order.
There are two additional ways to exit an option trade that are worthy of
discussion,namely (3) a stop loss order and (4) a stop limit order.
I recommend never using a market order to exit a trade, except in
extreme situations in which it seems imperative to exit a trade immedi-
ately to avoid substantial loss. Keep in mind that the fill price you
receive on a market order to sell an option will not be any higher than
the bid and will often be significantly lower.
As for a limit order, the situation is analogous to that of entering the
trade.You select a price that you believe is reasonable to sell your long
option and enter that price with the limit order.You may not get a fill,
but if you do, it must be at that price or higher. Let’s reexamine
Examples 1A through 3A to illustrate how to determine an appropriate
price for a limit order to exit a trade:
■ Example 1B.Bid =$2.40 and ask =$2.45.Again,there is no
room for negotiation here.The spread =$.05,which is the
30
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

minimum possible for an option trading under $3 per
share. Place a limit order to sell at $2.40 and you should get
a quick fill.
■ Example 2B.Bid =$2.40 and ask =$2.80.With the spread =
$.40,there is some room for negotiation.You could try to split
the spread in the middle with a limit order to sell at $2.60.
Getting filled at that price under slow conditions could prove
difficult.If you move the limit price down to $2.55 or $2.50,
you are much more likely to get filled.
■ Example 3B.Bid =$4.10 and ask =$4.40.Because the option is
trading over $3 per share,the minimum spread would be $.10.
Here the spread is $.30,which suggests that there may be some
room for negotiation.Youcannot split the difference at $4.15
because an option over $3 must be priced in $.10 increments.
Typically,a limit order to sell at $4.30 is pointless,because you
are asking the market maker to give up more than half the
spread.A more realistic approach is to place a limit order at
$4.20.This gives the market maker a $.20 spread,which should
be enoughto get the trade filled.
Next,let’s examine the use of the stop loss order for selling an option.
With this order,you indicate a trigger price at which you want the order
to be initiated. The order to sell is then activated when either (1) the
option trades at the trigger price or lower,or (2) the ask is at the trigger
price or lower.When the order is activated,it becomes a market order
to sell the option. As with a straight market order, this means the fill
will not be any better than the bid when the order is activated and it
may be substantially worse.My recommendation about using this type
oforder is only under extreme circumstances in which you are trying to
avoid substantial loss.
Finally,let’s consider the stop limit order for selling an option.As with
a stop loss order, you indicate a trigger price at which you want the
order to be initiated. But here you also indicate a limit price at which
you want to sell your long option. The order is activated under the
same two conditions previously described for the stop loss order. The
difference here is that when the order is activated, it becomes a limit
order to sell at the price you selected.
31
Chapter 3 Entering and Exiting Option Trades

Getting filled on a stop limit order can prove tricky.You must carefully
select your trigger price and your limit price to give yourself the best
opportunity for a fill.If you set the limit price too close to the trigger
price, you may not get a fill in circumstances in which you definitely
want to be filled.Let’s look at an example:
■ Example 1C.You have a long call currently trading at $4.You
want to try and protect this position with a stop limit order so
that you will sell this option for no less than $3.50.Let’s see
what might happen if you set a trigger price of $3.60 and a
limit price of $3.50.Suppose it occurs that the option price
drops until the ask =$3.60 and the bid =$3.40.Because the ask
has reflected your trigger price,your limit order to sell at $3.50
is then activated.Unfortunately,you will not get a fill here
because the bid is lower than your limit price.
To avoid this situation,the gap between the trigger price and the limit
price should be adjusted to reflect the anticipated bid/ask spread when
the order is activated.In this example,it looks as if the trigger should
have been set at $3.70 so as to account for the spread =$.20.Then,ifthe
option price drops until the ask =$3.70 and the bid =$3.50,your order
to sell will be activated with a limit price which is the same as the bid.
This provides a much better chance ofbeing filled at your desired price
of $3.50.
32
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND