4
THE GREEKS
A s you learn about options and listen to the conversations of
options traders, you will hear certain Greek letters mentioned.
What are they talking about when they mention the delta,theta,
gamma,vega (not a Greek letter),and rho? Are they referring to their
favorite college fraternity or sorority?
The “Greeks,”as they are called in the terminology of options trading,
are one-word expressions used to describe how the price of an option
changes when something else changes. The origin of this terminology
lies in the theory of options pricing where these Greek letters were first
introduced to define these price changes in exact mathematical state-
ments. The main goal of this chapter is to provide an overview of the
Greeks and their role in the trading of options.
Delta
The most basic and useful ofthe Greeks is the delta.Even with a simple
working knowledge ofthe delta,you are immediately going to be a bet-
ter options trader.
Delta:The amount that the price of an option changes as compared to
a $1 increase in the stock price.This quantity is typically expressed as
either a decimal or a percentage.
Computing the Delta of a Call Option
Let’s illustrate with some examples:
■ Example 1.XYZ is at $30 per share.The Mar 30 call,which
expires in three weeks,is priced at $2 per share.Suppose the
price of XYZ increases by $2 up to $32 per share.Typically,this
33

will cause the price of the Mar 30 call to increase by $1 up to
$3per share.
Let’s compute the delta for this Mar 30 call:Its price increased
by $1 when the stock price increased by $2.Thus,the delta is
given by the fraction 1/2 = .50,or 50 percent.So,a delta of
.50indicates that the price of the option increases by 50 percent
the amount of the increase in the price of the stock.
This example illustrates an important basic property that
holds for most options,namely,an at-the-money call (that is,
strike pricenearly the same as the stock price) typically has a
delta of about .50.
■ Example 2.XYZ is at $30 per share.The Mar 25 call,which
expires in three weeks,is priced at $6 per share.Suppose the
price of XYZ increases by $2 up to $32 per share.This might
cause the price of the Mar 25 call to increase by $1.60 up to
$7.60 per share.
Let’s compute the delta for this Mar 25 call:Its price increased
by $1.60 when the stock priced increased by $2.Thus the delta
is given by the fraction 1.6/2 = .80,or 80 percent.
This example illustrates another basic property of options,
namely,an in-the-money call (that is,strike price well below the
stock price) will have a delta greater than .50 but less than 1.0.
The deeper-in-the-money,the closer the delta will be to 1.0.
■ Example 3.XYZ is at $30 per share.The Mar 35 call,which
expires in three weeks,is priced at $.60 per share.Suppose the
price of XYZ increases by $2 up to $32 per share.This might
cause the price of the Mar 35 call to increase by $.20 up to
$.80per share.
Let’s compute the delta for this Mar 35 call:Its price increased
by $.20 when the stock price increased by $2.Thus the delta is
given by the fraction 0.2/2 = .10,or 10 percent.
This example illustrates yet another basic property of options,
namely an out-of-the-money call (that is,strike price well
above the stock price) will have a delta less than .50.The fur-
ther out-of the-money,the smaller will be the delta.
34
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

The delta values described in the preceding examples are typical for
options that are not too close to expiration.Near-expiration,all in-the-
money options will have a delta close to one,and all out-of-the-money
will have adelta close to zero.
Application of the Delta
Now let’s see how our experience with these three examples can help us
with our options trading. You believe that the stock price of XYZ is
going to increase in the near future and you want to play this move with
options.What are you choices?
Buy an in-the-money call:Ifyou want to capture an almost dollar-for-
dollar increase in the price of the stock, you need to purchase an
option with a high delta. This means selecting a deep-in-the-money
call. If the option has a delta of .80, it will increase $.80 in price for
every $1 increase in the price of XYZ.The deep-in-the-money call will
be relatively expensive, but it will capture more of the price move in
the stock.
Buy an at-the-money or out-of-the-money call: If you can count on
asignificant move in the stock within a short period of time, an at-
the-money or out-of-the money call can yield a higher percentage
increase in the price of the call. If the option has a delta of .50, a
$2increase in the price of XYZ will produce a $1 increase in the price
of the option. If the option has delta of .20, a $2 increase the stock
price will produce a $.40 increase in the price of the option.Because
an at-the-money call will be relatively cheap and an out-of-the-
money call will be even cheaper,these options offer more leverage for
a profit.
At first glance,it might seem that you would always choose the at-the-
money or out-of-the money call, because of the higher leverage.
Thereal issue is whether the stock price will rise high enough and
quickly enough for the extra leverage to yield a better profit.Suppose
the trades in the above Examples 1, 2, and 3 were initiated when the
March options were only three weeks from expiration. Also, suppose
that XYZ waits until one week before expiration to make the $2 rise
35
Chapter 4 The Greeks

from $30 to $32.Let’s follow up to see what might happen in the above
examples.
■ Example 1 follow-up.All the value of the Mar 30 call was
timevalue.With only one week to go until expiration,its price
could have fallen to $1,whereas its delta might still be .50.
Then,the $2 move in XYZ would yield a $1 increase in the
price of the option,bringing its value back to $2 per share for
break-even.
■ Example 2 follow-up.The Mar 25 call had only $1 of time
value (25+ 6 – 30 = 1),so its price might have fallen to $5.40,
with its delta remaining at .80.Then,the $2 move in XYZ
would yield a $1.60 increase in the price of the option,bringing
its value to $7 per share,for a net profit of $1 per share.
■ Example 3 follow-up.All of the value of the Mar 35 call
wastime value.Being so far out-of-the money with only a
weekuntil expiration,its price might have dropped to $.15 a
share with its delta remaining at .10.Then,the $2 move in
XYZwould yield a $.20 increase in the price of the option,
bringing its value to $.35 per share,for a net loss of $.25 per
share.
What has been learned about the delta in these examples?
When considering an option to buy, make a mental estimate of the
delta for that option. You do not necessarily need a precise value.
Decide on a realistic increase in the price ofthe stock you are following.
To estimate the new option price,first multiply the change in the stock
price by the (approximate) delta of the option to see how much the
value of the option would increase.Add that increase to the purchase
price of the option, while allowing for some loss of time value in the
option. If this estimate of the new price of the option represents an
acceptable profit,you have a good reason to buy the option.
The delta of an option is not fixed.When the price of the stock moves
significantly, the delta of an option will change. In Example 1, if XYZ
moves up to $35,the Mar 30 call is no longer an at-the-money option.
It has become an in-the-money option, and its delta will then be
36
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

considerably larger.This works in your favor,because as the stock price
rises to higher levels,the option price responds with a greater percent-
age of the stock gain.
Computing the Delta of a Put Option
The distinction between the delta for a call and the delta for a put
is that the delta of a long put is always negative. This is because
an increase in the stock price results in a decrease in the price of a
put. Analogous to a call option, an at-the-money put generally has a
delta of about –.50. An in-the-money put will have a delta between
–.50 and –1.0.An out-of-the-money put will have a delta between –.5
and 0.
Theta
The next most commonly encountered Greek is the theta. The
thetaprovides an estimate of how quickly your option is losing it time
value.
Theta:The amount that the price of an option changes as compared to
the passage of a unit of time (typically one day).
The value of theta is always a negative number,because the value of an
option diminishes over time.In the terminology of options,the loss of
time value is referred toas theta decay.
As a rough guide, the magnitude of theta for an at-the-money option
varies inversely as the square root of the time remaining until expira-
tion.For example,an option that has 40 days until expiration loses time
value twice as fast as it did when it had 160 days until expiration
[square root (160/40) = 2].An option that has only 10 days until expi-
ration loses value 6 times as fast as it did when it had 360 days until
expiration [square root (360/10) = 6].
Some traders make a practice of never holding a long at-the-money
option that has less than three weeks until expiration, because of the
increasing rate at which the option will lose its value.With an out-of-
the-money option,the situation can be even worse.
37
Chapter 4 The Greeks

An easy way to get a rough measure ofthe theta ofan option is to com-
pare two options with the same strike price that have different expira-
tion dates.For example,suppose your at-the-money option has a value
of$4.30 per share with four months until expiration,whereas the option
with the same strike price and only two months until expiration has a
value of $2.50 per share. This means that, if the stock price remains
unchanged over the next 60 days, your option will lose about $1.80 in
value. That translates to a theta of approximately –$.03 per day
[–1.80/60 = –.03], which may not seem like much until you recognize
that it can add up to a 42 percent loss in the value of your option over
the next two months.
Gamma
Gamma:Theamount that the delta changes as compared to a $1 increase
in the price of the stock.
The gamma becomes important in situations where the delta of an
option becomes especially sensitive to changes in the price ofthe stock.
Such situations are said to have gamma risk. One such scenario in
which gamma becomes important occurs as an option approaches its
expiration date.
As expiration gets close, the usual delta values of in-the-money and
out-of-the-money options become distorted.All in-the-money options
will have a delta closer to one, whereas all out-of-the-money options
will have a delta that is closer to zero.So,a small increase in the stock
price,from slightly below a strike price to slightly above it,will cause a
change in the option delta from near zero to near one. This yields a
large value of gamma. There is considerable risk in such situations,
because a small decrease in the stock price can change a profitable call
into one that is worthless.
Vega
The “vega” of an option provides a measure of its volatility. Just as
stocks can be volatile,options can also be volatile,although there is not
always a direct correlation of those volatilities. A stock whose price is
38
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

volatile will typically have options with inflated prices, but it is also
possible for options prices to inflate with little or no movement in the
underlying stock price.
The point here is that each option has its own individual measure of
volatility that is dictated by its particular price action.In options termi-
nology, this individual volatility is called the implied volatility. The
manner in which implied volatility is determined is discussed in
Chapter 29,“Implied Volatility and the Black-Scholes Formula.”
Vega:The amount that the price ofan option changes as compared to a
unit increase in the volatility of the stock.
The importance of vega is seen whenever circumstances surrounding
the stock become excited for any one of a variety of reasons. Rumors
that a stock might be bought out will quickly inflate the prices of the
options associated with the stock.Under such a scenario,there can be a
large increase in the price of an option even if the stock price changes
little.This gives rise to a high vega.
Rho
Rho:The amount that the price of an option changes as compared to a
unit increase in the risk-free interest rate (that is, the rate for a U.S.
treasury bill).
Rho is positive for calls and negative for puts.With interest rates at the
relatively modest levels seen in recent years,the influence on the price
of options is slight.
39
Chapter 4 The Greeks

This page intentionally left blank