5
RISK GRAPHS
A n ancient Chinese proverb declares:“One picture is worth more
than ten thousand words.” And so it is with understanding
options trading.Because the value ofan option depends on sev-
eral factors, it is difficult to visualize the variety of ways its price can
change without some kind ofchart.The chart used to track the progress
of an options trade is called a risk graph.
To follow the price movement of a specific option, the two factors of
primary importance are the price of the underlying stock and the time
remaining until expiration.The risk graph provides the visual means to
comprehend how the profit or loss in an options trade is affected by
changes in stock price as well as changes in time.
Risk graphs are used liberally throughout this book as a supplemental
tool for visualizing the detailed workings of an options trade. These
graphs are generated by a special calculator based on the Black-Scholes
formula for pricing options,which is discussed in Chapter 29,“Implied
Volatility and the Black-Scholes Formula.”It is not necessary to under-
stand how this calculator works,but only to accept that it does an excel-
lent job in generating accurate options pricing data.
Basically,the risk graph is a two-dimensional plot of stock price versus
the profit or loss in the options trade.In this book,the modern style of
presentation is used,where the stock price is shown on the vertical scale
and the profit or loss in the trade is displayed on the horizontal scale.
(The old-fashion style of presentation interchanges these vertical and
horizontal scales.)
Note that it is not an option price shown on the horizontal scale of the
risk graph,because many risk graphs involve more than one option.It
41

is much more convenient to have those options prices converted into a
net profit or loss figure for display purposes. This allows the observer
to easily identify the desired price range of the stock for achieving a
profit on the trade.
To illustrate how the progression of time influences a trade,four time
lines are displayed on each risk graph.One ofthe time lines always rep-
resents the current state ofthe trade.Ifthe trade has just been initiated,
that time line is the current state.Another time line always provides the
projected profit or loss information at expiration.The other two time
lines provide the projected state of the trade at times between the cur-
rent state and expiration.
Single Option Trade
Let’s look at an example of a risk graph to illustrate a trade involving a
single long call:
■ Example 1.This example recalls Example 3 from Chapter 2,
“Option Selection.”We use a risk graph to demonstrate how the
information provided in that example was determined.
You think that XYZ is going to rise in price in the near to inter-
mediate future.In early April,XYZ is at $67.
You buy 1 Apr 70 call,which is priced at $1.50 per share.
See Figure 5-1 for the risk graph that depicts this trade of being a long
one XYZ Apr 70 call with 17 days until the option expires.
In Figure 5-1,the price of XYZ stock is shown on the vertical axis.On
the horizontal axis is the profit or loss in the value of the option,with
the zero point dividing the profit and loss regimes. The trade at the
time of initiation is represented by the line labeled as “today: 17 days
left.” The time line representing the trade at expiration is labeled as
“Expiry: 0 days left.”In between are additional time lines for “12 days
left”and “6 days left.”
This option seems cheap enough,but is it a good one to buy? To answer
this question,let’s see what XYZ needs to do for this option to provide
a reasonable profit.
42
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Today: 17 days left
12 days left
6 days left
Expiry: 0 days left
–1000
The Apr 70 call expires in a little over two weeks.Because this option is
out-of-the-money,all of its $1.50 price is time value.
If XYZ rockets up to $73 in one week,the option might become worth
$3.70 ($3 intrinsic value and $.70 time value). This represents a nice
$2.20 profit on a $1.50 investment,but it required a 9 percent gain in
the stock price in one week.
This profit information is found from the risk graph by moving hori-
zontally along the stock price line for $73 until a point is reached,
between the 6 days and 12 days time lines, which would represent
10 days left. Dropping down from that point to the horizontal axis
indicates a profit in the trade ofapproximately $220.Because this trade
involves only one Apr 70 call contract purchased for $150,this implies
an option price of $3.70 per share [(150 + 220)/100 = 3.7].
43
Chapter 5 Risk Graphs
ecirP
kcotS
08
07
06
–700 –500 –300 –100 100 300 500 700 900
Figure 5-1

If XYZ only manages to rise gradually over the next two weeks to reach
$71.50 just at expiration, the option will be worth $1.50 (all intrinsic
value and no time value at expiration).In this scenario,XYZ has gone up
by 7percent in three weeks,but you only break even on the option trade.
This information is found from the risk graph by noting that the time
line at expiration crosses the zero profit axis at $71.50.
Suppose XYZ barely edges up to $68.50 with one week remaining.
Then,this option might be worth only $1 (all time value),because it is
still out-of-the-money and has only one week of life remaining. Now
you have lost $.50 per share on the option even though the stock has
moved up slightly,and there is almost no time left to recover.
This information is found from the risk graph by moving horizontally
along the stock price line for $68.50 until a point is reached just to the
right of the 6 days time line. Dropping down from that point to the
horizontal axis indicates a loss in the trade of approximately $50.This
implies an option price of $1 per share [(150 – 50)/100 = 1.0].
Multiple Option Trade
Next,let’s consider a trade involving two options.One option will be a
long call that expires in a distant month,and the other option will be a
short call in a near month.Both options have the same strike price.This
type of trade is known as a calendar spread.
■ Example 2.This example of a calendar spread is presented and
discussed in Chapter 12,“Calendar Spreads.”Our goal here is
just to look at the risk graph and see how to read it.
The stock price ofXYZ is expected to trade within a narrow
range around $35 for the next several months.In early May with
XYZ at $34.70,the following trade is initiated.You buy 1 Nov
35call for $3.50 per share and sell 1 Jun 35 call for $1.30 per
share.Your net cost and maximum risk on this trade is $220
[(3.50−1.30)×100=220].
See Figure 5-2 for a risk graph that depicts this calendar trade.
44
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

Today: 39 days left
26 days left
13 days left
Expiry: 0 days left
–300 –200 –100 0
In Figure 5-2,note that on the day this trade is initiated,it is shown to
expire in 39 days.This is reflecting that the Jun 35 call will expire 39days
after the date it is sold in early May.The Nov 35 call does not expire for
another 150 days following the June expiration. This illustrates an
important feature of risk graphs.They are only valid up until the expi-
ration date of the earliest expiring option.To follow the progress of the
trade after that date requires the calculation of a new risk graph.
From Figure 5-2,it is easy to see where you would like the price ofXYZ
stock to be when the Jun 35 call expires.The time line representing the
trade at the June expiration date crosses the zero profit axis at $33 and
$38.Thus,this calendar trade returns a profit at the June expiration if
the price ofXYZ is between $33 and $38 with a maximum profit of$90
if the stock price is exactly $35.
45
Chapter 5 Risk Graphs
ecirP
kcotS
04
03
Figure 5-2

Comments
Even for a single option trade like that of Example 1,a risk graph can
prove useful in making decisions about exiting a trade. Knowing that
the option will achieve a profit only if the stock price rises by a certain
amount before a particular date can be crucial information.
For trades with multiple options, particularly where the options have
different expiration dates, the risk graph provides information that is
very difficult to otherwise determine.In Example 2,the existence of a
profit zone between $33 and $38 would be a mystery without the ben-
efit of the risk graph.
Note in both ofthe examples that the point on the initial time line cor-
responding to the stock price at the time ofentry lies slightly to the left
ofthe zero profit axis.That is,as soon as the trade is entered,it is show-
ing a small loss.This is known as slippage.It results from the difference
between the bid and ask prices for an option, which was discussed in
Chapter 3,“Entering and Exiting Option Trades.”
Risk graphs can also be adjusted to reflect the influence ofother factors
that affect the price of an option.Most notable are the changes in the
risk graph due to a significant change in the volatility of the option
prices.
46
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND