7
ASSIGNMENT
ANXIETY
One thing that causes anxiety for beginning options traders is the
prospect ofreceiving anassignment on an option that they have
sold. The goal in this chapter is to relieve some of the anxiety
about this aspect of options trading.
In this chapter,it is assumed that you do not have a naked short call or
a naked short put position.If you do,you are entirely justified in being
anxious, because you are vulnerable to substantial risk. Only experi-
enced options traders should venture into naked option trading. This
aspect of options trading is discussed later in Chapter 20, “Naked
Option Writing,”and Chapter 21,“Stock Substitutes.”
So, it is assumed here that your short option position is covered by
either long stock or a long option position.By having a compensating
stock or option position, you will be well placed to emerge from an
assignment with only limited loss or even possibly a profit depending
on the circumstances of the trade.This chapter uses a variety of exam-
ples to clarify your thinking about the possibility of an assignment.
To begin,let’s look at the typical circumstances under which you might
be subjected to an early option assignment (that is, an option is exer-
cised against you before the expiration date of the option):
Guideline 1: If the short option is out-of-the-money, you will (essen-
tially) never receive an assignment.
53

To understand why this is true,consider these examples:
■ Example 1.In early November,the price of XYZ stock is $38,
and you are short the Nov 40 call.Someone who wants to own
XYZ stock is not going to exercise his right to buy the stock
from you at $40 per share,because he can buy the stock in the
market for only $38 per share.
■ Example 2.In early November,the price of XYZ stock is $38,
and you are short the Nov 35 put.Someone who wants to sell
his XYZ stock is not going to exercise his right to make you buy
his stock at $35 per share when he can sell it in the market for
$38 per share.
Guideline 2: If the option is in-the-money,there is not going to be an
early assignment as long as there is sufficient time value included in the
price of the option.
To illustrate this concept,consider these examples:
■ Example 3.In early November,the price of XYZ stock is $41,
and you are short the Nov 40 call,which is currently being bid
at $2.You are not going to receive an assignment when the
option price includes time value of $1 [2.0 – (41 – 40) = 1.0].
If the person who holds the Nov 40 call wants to own the stock,
he is much better off buying the stock in the market for $41
and selling his call to someone else for $2.If he did require
youto sell him your stock at $40,it is true that he would save
$1 per share on the purchase price of the stock,but he would
give up the opportunity to collect $2 per share by selling his
option.
■ Example 4.In early November,the price of XYZ stock is $34,
and you are short the Nov 35 put,which is currently being bid
at $2.You are not going to receive an assignment when there is
time value of $1 [2.0 – (35 – 34) = 1.0].If the person who
holds the Nov 35 put wants to get rid of his stock,he is much
better off selling the stock in the market for $34 and selling his
put to someone else for $2.If he did require you to buy his
stock at $35,it is true that he would gain $1 per share on the
54
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

sale price of the stock,but he would give up the opportunity to
collect $2 per share by selling his option.
Guideline 3:When the expiration date ofa short option is close and the
time value ofan in-the-money option has almost disappeared,the pos-
sibility of an early assignment becomes much more likely.
Let’s reexamine Examples 3 and 4 in the last few days before the
November expiration date:
■ Example 5.One week before the November options expire,the
price of XYZ is $41.You are short the Nov 40 call,which is cur-
rently bid at $1.10.With time value of only $.10 [1.10 – (41 –
40) = .10],there is a real possibility of an early assignment.
Someone who wants to own this stock may decide that the
extra $.10 per share that could be gained from buying the stock
and selling the option is not worth the trouble.
■ Example 6.One week before the November options expire,the
price of XYZ is $34.You are short the Nov 35 put,which is cur-
rently bid at $1.10.With time value of only $.10 [1.10 – (35 –
34) = .10],there is a real possibility of an early assignment.
Someone who wants to get rid of his stock may decide that the
extra $.10 per share that could be gained from selling the stock
and selling the option is not worththe trouble.
Comments
Examples 1 and 2 suggest that an early assignment is not going to occur
when there is $1 (or more) of time value, whereas Examples 3 and 4
suggest that you should be prepared for an early assignment when the
time value is $.10 (or less). As a general guideline, the dividing point
between these two outcomes is about $.15 to $.20 of time value.If the
bid price of the option includes at least $.20 of time value, an early
assignment is rather unlikely.If the bid price of the option includes no
more than $.15 of time value,the possibility of an early assignment is
more likely.
In comparing the scenarios of Examples 5 and 6,the early assignment
of the put option happens more often than the early assignment of the
55
Chapter 7 Assignment Anxiety

call option. Someone who wants to get rid of his stock via an assign-
ment is usually in a rush to get the cash from the sale and move on to a
new investment. Someone who is considering buying the stock via an
assignment is more likely to postpone the purchase as long as possible
so as to avoid committing the cash until absolutely necessary.
The possibility ofan early assignment can sometimes depend on a divi-
dend payment.You may be more susceptible to the early assignment of
a short call from someone who wants to collect an upcoming dividend.
You may be less susceptible to an early assignment of a short put from
someone who wants to wait for the dividend payment before selling his
stock.
Whenever your short option becomes deep-in-the-money,there will be
very little time value in the bid price of the option,even if the expira-
tion date is far into the future.This situation makes early assignment a
definite possibility.
If you judge that your situation is such that an early assignment is a
possibility,check the open interest (number of outstanding contracts)
on your option.A low level of open interest makes an early assignment
morelikely.
Applications
Now let’s look at some situations involving either a covered call trade or
a spread trade.In a covered call trade,your short option is hedged by
stock that you own.In a spread trade,your short option is hedged by a
long option.
■ Example 7.Covered call.You own 100 shares of XYZ stock,and
you have sold one Nov 40 call for $2.50 per share.As long as
the stock price is below $40,as in Example 1,you have no con-
cern about early assignment.Even when the stock price is above
$40,there is no concern if there is sufficient time value in the
option price,as in Example 3.Only when the stock price is
above $40 and the time value included in the option price falls
to $.15 or less do you need to worry about an early assignment,
as in Example 5.
56
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

In a covered call trade,if an early assignment becomes a real
possibility,you must decide on a course of action:
1. You can elect to do nothing,in which case your stock even-
tually will be bought from you at the strike price of the short
option.This need not be viewed as an undesirable outcome.
You get to keep the cash received from the sale of the short
call,and you might be taking a profit on a stock that is soon
due for a pullback.
2. You can elect to “roll out”of your short call.In Example 5,
you can buy back the Nov 40 call and then sell a Dec 45 call.
This will allow your stock to run to the $45 level until the
December options expiration date.
■ Example 8.Bull call spread.Being bullish on XYZ stock,you
buy one Nov 35 call for $4.70 per share and sell one Nov 40 call
for $2.50 per share.This represents a net cost of $220 [(4.70 –
2.50)×100 = 220].If XYZ is above $40 at expiration,the
spread should ideally be showing a profit of $280 [(40 – 35) ×
100 – 220 = 280].Suppose that as the November expiration
arrives,XYZ is trading at $41.You will often find that if you try
to exit the spread by buying back the Nov 40 call and then sell-
ing the Nov 35 call,you will only be able to bring in something
like $4.80 per share rather than the expected $5 per share.This
is due to the slippage in the bid and ask prices on the options.
To get the full $5,allow your short Nov 40 call to be assigned,
while you exercise your right of the Nov 35 call to buy the stock
at $35.So XYZ stock will be bought at exactly $35 and then
sold at exactly $40,giving you the $5 difference that you
deserve.
■ Example 9.Calendar spread.XYZ is trading near $40 and the
front-month options seem to have extra time value,so you
decide to capture some of that premium through a calendar
spread.You buy one Jan 40 call for $4 per share and sell one
Nov 35 call for $2.50 per share for a net cost of $150 [(4.00 –
2.50)×100 = 150].Soon after you initiate this trade,it is
announced that XYZ is being bought by another company for
57
Chapter 7 Assignment Anxiety

$50 per share.As a result of this situation,you will find that
both the Nov 40 call and the Jan 40 call are priced close to
$10 per share with essentially no time value.You are likely
tosoon be assigned on your short call.The easiest way to
counteract this assignment is to exercise your right of the
Jan40 call to buy XYZ at $40 per share.So XYZ stock will be
bought at $40 per share and sold at $40 per share.Your loss on
this calendar spread is limited to the original cost of $150 to
initiate the trade.
58
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND