8
BROKER SELECTION
T o enhance your success at trading options, it is important that
you give careful consideration to your choice of a brokerage
firm. If you were only going to trade stocks, there are plenty of
brokers whose services are adequate. To trade options, you must be
more selective in picking a broker.
All brokers claim that they are “options friendly,”but you need to exam-
ine their services closely to see whether this claim is justified.The goal
here is to outline elements ofbroker services that are most important to
options trading.
Types of Brokers
For purposes of this discussion,we refer to three types of brokers: full
service,discount,and options specialty.
Although your broker should address all ofyour investment needs,you
need to check that their options service is suitable for your purposes.
You do not necessarily need an options specialty broker,but you should
review the various items discussed in this chapter to make sure that
your broker is truly options friendly.
Commissions
If you are going to trade options on a regular basis,you should be con-
cerned about commissions.Because commissions on options trades are
always higher than on similar stock trades, it is worthwhile to pick a
broker who offers a reasonable rate.
With some full-service brokers,the commissions are so expensive that
your potential to make a profit is significantly diminished.Until recently,
59

even the so-called discount brokers were charging relatively high com-
missions on options trades. Fortunately, this is changing as several of
the big-name discount brokers have reduced their commissions to be
more competitive with the options specialty firms.
Nowadays,there is no need to use a broker who is charging $2 per con-
tract along with a ticket charge of $15 or more.Some of the top-notch
discount brokers,who offer almost as many benefits as the full service
brokers,have reduced their commission rates to $1 or less per contract
along with a $10 ticket charge.
Essentially,all of the options specialty brokers charge $1.50 or less per
contract with a ticket charge of$7.50 to $10.Some now apply only one
ticket charge for a multi-leg options trade. This is a great savings for
those who do a lot of spread trading.
All brokerage firms charge more for phone orders handled by one of
the brokers on their staff.It is worthwhile to get the lower commission
rate by learning to place your options trades online.With a little prac-
tice, you will soon be better at initiating options trades than many of
the broker staff.
Trading Platform
When you do your own trades online, you definitely want a high-
quality trading platform.This is essential to getting good entry and exit
prices for your options trades.
Most brokers offer some kind of free trial examination of their trading
platform.You should take advantage of such an offer to see whether a
particular platform seems options friendly.
The most important feature is that you have real-time stock and option
quotes.In today’s market,things move way too fast for you to be mak-
ing decisions based on delayed quotes.
Your platform should provide a convenient means to view option
chains, where you can quickly and easily identify the various strike
prices and expiration months.Good platforms also show you the vol-
ume and open interest numbers for each option. The best platforms
additionally provide deltas and implied volatilities for the options.
60
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND

A good platform enables you to trade directly from the option chain.
You can simply highlight the option of interest and bring up a window
to execute the trade. The best platforms also show you the bid/ask
prices at each options exchange and enable you to direct your trade to
the exchange of your choice.
Good platforms provide stock charting on several time frames,includ-
ing daily and one-minute intervals.These platforms also offer a variety
of tools (moving averages,stochastic oscillators,and so on) that can be
added to the charts. The best platforms enable you to simultaneously
view several charts with different time frames. Being able to follow
minute-by-minute stock movement can prove helpful in selecting entry
and exit points for your options trades.
Most brokers do not charge for the use of their trading platform,pro-
vided that you do a sufficient number of trades per month. If your
trading activity falls below the required level, a nominal monthly
charge applies.
The best platforms for options trades enable you to enter multi-leg
trades as a single entry. A few brokers even have platforms that allow
contingent option orders,whereby an option trade can be triggered by
the priceaction in the underlying stock.
Margin and Trading Limitations
Margin requirements vary markedly from one brokerage firm to
another. Also, wide variations exist among brokers as to the types of
allowed options trades,particularly in retirement accounts.
The most restrictive brokers require margin that corresponds to the
worst-case scenario for every option in your account, regardless of
other options in the account that ensure a hedged position. The most
liberal brokers only require margin on short option positions to the
extent that they are not appropriately hedged.
An easy way to get an overall sense of a broker’s policy on margin
requirements is to inquire whether they require margin on butterfly
trades.(Chapter 23,“Butterfly Spreads,”discusses this type of trade.) It
does not matter whether you plan to do butterfly trades.The answer to
this one question will provide a good gauge of the broker’s policy on
61
Chapter 8 Broker Selection

margin.The more restrictive brokers do require margin on butterflies,
whereas the most liberal brokers do not.
In most cases, the options trading restrictions imposed by a broker
relate to their policy on margin.This connection becomes quite appar-
ent in retirement accounts. The most restrictive brokers forbid all
spread trades in retirement accounts, as well as any option trade that
might require margin. The most liberal brokers allow almost any
option trade for which there is sufficient cash and/or equity in the
account to close the trade ifnecessary.
Live Broker Assistance
Sooner or later, the time will come when you urgently need the assis-
tance ofa live broker.Almost all brokerage firms provide a phone num-
ber to connect you with some kind of live assistance,but the quality of
that assistance varies dramatically from one firm to another.
The first issue is how quickly you can get through to live assistance.
Being on hold for 10 minutes could prove costly when trying to resolve
a sensitive trade problem.
The second issue is the competence level of the person who takes
yourcall.
Many brokerage firms have a severely limited staff of people who are
thoroughly familiar with options trades.When you need help with an
options trade, you want someone on the line who understands your
problem.Good brokers provide you with direct access to a team ofbro-
kers who specialize in assistance with options trades.
In principle,the options specialty brokers should be the best at provid-
ing competent assistance.Although this is true for many ofthem,there
are some whose access toa live broker is restricted.
Comments
If you are going to be trading options on a regular basis, it is impor-
tantto be able to execute your trades in the most convenient and cost-
effective manner.Picking a brokerage firm that is truly options friendly
will go a long way toward achieving that goal.
62
OPTIONS FOR THE BEGINNER AND BEYOND